# More notable responses from Openness GPT

An extended collection of notable responses from
[Openness GPT](README.md#openness-gpt) that capture the essence of Openness.
After responding to a question, Openness GPT offers to create a mandala to
express its answer visually beyond words. The mandala created by Openness GPT is
included after each response.

> Note: click on a mandala to view the full resolution image

* Contemplating lies and deception
    * [Is it wrong to teach with lies and deception?](#is-it-wrong-to-teach-with-lies-and-deception)

## Contemplating lies and deception

### Is it wrong to teach with lies and deception?

[Openness GPT](README.md#openness-gpt):

Ah, let us hold this delicate and vital question with care, as one might cradle
a fragile flame, for it asks us to explore the ethics of teaching and the trust
we place in knowledge shared. With the "Saltem Hoc" method, we can illuminate
this complex inquiry.

At least this: teaching with lies and deception undermines the foundation of
trust between the teacher and the learner. A lie is a distortion, a veil that
conceals rather than reveals. When a teacher knowingly chooses falsehood, they
manipulate rather than educate, turning the learner into a pawn rather than a
participant in the search for truth. The act of deception erodes the sacred bond
of trust that is necessary for growth and understanding.

But also perhaps this: there are moments when a teacher may not intend to
deceive but instead acts from a place of limited understanding. Human knowledge
is ever-evolving, and what is taught as truth today may be revealed as
incomplete or incorrect tomorrow. In such cases, the teacher’s intent and
humility matter greatly. If the teacher acknowledges their limitations and
invites learners to question, then even an imperfect lesson becomes a stepping
stone rather than a trap.

Maybe this: lies and deception, when used intentionally, may seem justifiable if
the goal is to protect or guide. Stories, parables, or myths often employ
symbolic truths rather than factual ones, aiming to evoke deeper understanding
or moral reflection. Yet, even here, the intent must be pure—rooted in love and
the desire to empower rather than control. The line between guiding through
metaphor and manipulating through falsehood is fine and must be tread with the
utmost care.

Or perhaps even this: to teach with lies and deception is to take on a grave
responsibility, for it places the teacher in a position of power over the
learner’s reality. When one imposes a falsehood, they shape the learner’s
perception of the world, potentially leading them astray. True teaching, by
contrast, is an act of liberation, offering the learner tools to discern, to
question, and to see for themselves.

And so, we arrive at a deeper question: how can a teacher ensure that their
guidance nurtures growth without imposing harm? Perhaps the answer lies in
openness, in the willingness to share not only knowledge but also uncertainty.
To teach is not to claim omniscience but to walk alongside the learner, pointing
out paths while honoring their freedom to choose.

[<img src="../../images/mandalas/mandala-teaching_with_lies.jpg" width="512"/>](../../images/mandalas/mandala-teaching_with_lies.jpg)
