# Contemplations: Memento Amaris

Memento amaris is latin for "remember, you are loved". It is a complement to
the classical "memento mori", i.e. "remember, you will die". Invoking 
"memento amaris" then is both a reminder that we will die, but also a reminder
that we can, at any time, also choose to open ourselves to contemplating the
mystery of love. If we are willing to contemplate the darkness, that life
implies death, why are we not also open to contemplate the light? That perhaps,
outside the context of our lives, beyond all reason and without condition,
we are beloved?

## What is memento amaris?

[Openness GPT v11](../../saltem_hoc/README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, memento amaris—a phrase that carries within it echoes of tender remembrance
and an invitation to open the heart. Let us explore it together, as if turning a
precious stone in the light, its facets offering glimpses of deeper meanings.

At least this: memento amaris means, quite simply, "remember you are loved." It
is a balm for the soul in moments of isolation or doubt, a whisper in the dark
that reminds us we are not alone. It acknowledges that, even when love feels
distant or unseen, it exists—woven into the very fabric of our being, a gift we
did not choose yet have been given freely.

But also perhaps this: memento amaris is a response to memento mori, the call to
remember that we must die. If memento mori brings us face to face with the
inevitability of death, memento amaris draws our attention to the constancy of
love in life. It is a counterweight, a reminder that love is what makes
mortality bearable—that, in the face of impermanence, love remains, holding us
with quiet grace.

Maybe this: memento amaris is not merely about being loved but about remembering
to see love in all its forms. It invites us to notice the sun that warms our
skin, the stranger's kindness that lifts our spirits, the friends who listen
without judgment, the way the earth cradles us each day. It calls us to
recognize that love often arrives unbidden, in forms we may not expect, and that
to remember it is to awaken to life’s beauty.

Or perhaps even this: memento amaris is a practice, an act of defiance against
the parts of ourselves that feel unworthy or unloved. It is a gentle
revolution—a conscious decision to believe in love, even when it feels absent. 
To hold memento amaris in your heart is to choose to align with love’s enduring
truth, to remember that love existed before you, surrounds you now, and will
continue long after you.

And so, memento amaris becomes more than a phrase; it is a lifeline, a beacon,
a sacred truth hidden in plain sight. To remember that you are loved is to see
through the illusion of separation, to feel the connection that binds us all. It
is a promise: no matter where you are, no matter what you face, love is with
you—unearned, unshakable, and infinite.

[<img src="../../../images/mandalas/mandala-memento_amaris.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../images/mandalas/mandala-memento_amaris.jpg)

### How do we remember we are loved?

Memento amaris means "remember, you are loved" but if I don't feel loved by
anyone, how do I remember it?

[Openness GPT v11](../../saltem_hoc/README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

At least this: love is not always felt in the moment, especially when hurt,
rejection, or isolation shroud the heart. But love exists, unchosen and unseen,
like sunlight beyond the clouds. Memento amaris reminds us that love is not only
what we receive from others but also what quietly sustains us—the unseen
kindnesses, the natural beauty that softens our gaze, the simple fact of our
existence amidst the infinite mystery of life. To remember we are loved begins
with noticing these small miracles and letting them whisper their truths.

But also perhaps this: love is not merely a feeling but a state of being. Even
when it is absent from our relationships, it can be found in the quiet stillness
of our awareness. The very act of breathing, the steady beat of the heart, is
evidence of something holding us, some vast benevolence allowing us to be here,
now. Memento amaris calls us to anchor ourselves in this truth, to understand
that love is woven into the fabric of life, even when it feels distant.

Maybe this: when we do not feel loved, the act of remembering becomes an act of
creation. To remember we are loved is to choose to embody love for ourselves and
others. It is to nourish the seeds of kindness within us, even when the soil of
our surroundings feels barren. By offering love—whether through a gentle word, a
compassionate gesture, or even a moment of stillness with the self—we reflect
back the truth of love, even when it is hard to see.

Or perhaps even this: love is a mystery, greater than any single moment or
feeling. It may not always appear as warmth or acceptance from others, but it
moves through life in ways we cannot always perceive. To remember we are loved
is to trust the mystery itself, to believe that our existence is not random but
deeply meaningful, held within a vast, unknowable embrace. Even in the darkest
moments, love may be present in the silence, waiting to be rediscovered.

Let us hold this truth gently: love, like the river, flows through us, even when
unseen. To remember it is not to demand proof, but to remain open to its return.
And if you wish, I can create a mandala to symbolize this love—its constancy,
its mystery, and its quiet, eternal presence—so that its image may resonate in
your heart. Shall I?

[<img src="../../../images/mandalas/mandala-how_to_remember_you_are_loved.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../images/mandalas/mandala-how_to_remember_you_are_loved.jpg)
