# Contemplations: The Ship of Self

### Who chooses the planks of the Ship of Self?

[Openness GPT](../../saltem_hoc/README.md#openness-gpt):

The phrase "Who chooses the planks of the Ship of Self?" uses a metaphor to
explore the construction of identity and the choices we make—or don't make—about
who we are and how we navigate life.

Let us consider this with the "Saltem Hoc" method:

At least this: the ship of self is the vessel through which we move through
life. Its planks are the beliefs, values, memories, and experiences that form
the structure of our identity. Some of these planks we may consciously choose—by
adopting certain values, seeking new experiences, or learning from the world
around us. Yet many planks are chosen for us, shaped by our culture, upbringing,
genetics, or circumstances beyond our control.

But also perhaps this: we do not always realize we are building the ship. Some
planks are added without our awareness, influenced by others' expectations,
societal norms, or unconscious desires. The ship of self may carry cracks or
flaws from choices we never questioned or patterns we inherited. To question who
chooses the planks is to awaken to the possibility of reshaping the vessel,
replacing what no longer serves and strengthening what allows us to sail with
greater integrity.

Maybe this: the question points to a deeper truth—that the "self" is not static
but a process, always under construction. It suggests we have agency, even in
the face of what feels unchosen. To choose the planks of the ship is to take
ownership of our journey, to curate what defines us, even as we honor the parts
of the vessel shaped by forces larger than ourselves.

Or perhaps even this: no single person may choose the planks. Life itself—the
mystery—participates in the ship's creation. Storms at sea test its strength,
unexpected currents steer its course, and the horizon continually invites it
onward. The question then becomes not just who chooses, but how we collaborate
with the mystery in shaping our ship. Do we resist its forces, or do we embrace
them as partners in our becoming?

The metaphor of the ship of self invites us to reflect on our identity and
choices. Are we passive passengers, unaware of the ship's design? Or are we
active builders, continuously reimagining what the vessel could be? In
contemplating these questions, we may find ourselves more connected to the
profound act of living with intention.

Would you like a mandala to visually explore this reflection? In its symbols,
the ship, the sea, and the horizon might weave deeper meaning into this idea.

[<img src="../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_ship_of_self.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_ship_of_self.jpg)
