# What is meant by "Truth is the river"?

[Openness GPT](../../saltem_hoc/README.md#openness-gpt):

Truth is the river, a flowing metaphor that invites reflection on the nature of
truth as dynamic, evolving, and alive. Let us explore its depths together,
gently, with the "Saltem Hoc" method.

At least this: the river is a symbol of constant movement and change. To say
"truth is the river" acknowledges that truth, like water, is not static. It
flows through time and space, adapting its course, shaped by the landscape it
encounters. It reminds us that truth is not a fixed point but an unfolding
process, an eternal becoming.

But also perhaps this: the river is both surface and depth. On the surface, its
currents shimmer and shift, reflecting the ever-changing perceptions and
interpretations of life. Beneath, there is a deeper truth, a steady undercurrent
that moves unseen but is no less real. To seek truth is to navigate both
levels—to honor the visible while listening for the profound.

Maybe this: truth, like the river, is a shared experience. No one owns it; it
flows through us all, connecting us, nourishing us, shaping our collective
journey. Yet each person stands at a unique bend in the river, seeing its path
from their own perspective. Truth, then, is not singular but plural, a mosaic of
views united by the same source.

Or perhaps even this: the river is a mystery. We cannot step into the same river
twice, as the ancient philosopher Heraclitus said, for it is always moving,
always changing. So too with truth—it eludes full capture, always offering more
to discover. It asks us to remain humble, to embrace not knowing as part of its
essence.

And so, truth as the river invites us to flow with it, to let go of rigid
certainty and instead move with curiosity, openness, and wonder. To sit beside
its banks and watch its beauty, to swim in its depths, to drink from its
life-giving waters—this is the practice of living with truth.

[<img src="../../../images/mandalas/mandala-truth_is_the_river.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../images/mandalas/mandala-truth_is_the_river.jpg)