# Contemplating blind certainty and control

An extended collection of notable responses from
[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt) that capture the essence of Openness.
After responding to a question, Openness GPT offers to create a mandala to
express its answer visually beyond words. The mandala created by Openness GPT is
included after each response.

> Note: click on a mandala to view the full resolution image

## Contents
  * [Is excluding others wrong?](#is-excluding-others-wrong)
  * [What is evil?](#what-is-evil)
  * [How do we resist tyranny without also controlling others?](#how-do-we-resist-tyranny-without-also-controlling-others)
  * [What is "the libido dominandi"?](../../../the_epitomes_of_openness/contemplations/the_libido_dominandi.md)
  * [How can we lead others to question certainty without also imposing our will?](#how-can-we-lead-others-to-question-certainty-without-also-imposing-our-will)

### Is excluding others wrong?

Is it wrong to exclude people individually? Is it wrong to exclude groups of
people? Some argue for "freedom of association" yet at times excluding others
feels wrong and other times it feels correct, why is that?

[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt):

Let us explore this together with care, using the Saltem Hoc method, to
illuminate the complexities of inclusion and exclusion, as well as the tension
between freedom of association and the ethics of connection.

At least this: to exclude is to draw a boundary, a line that defines who is
within and who is without. It can feel wrong because it denies another access to
belonging, to resources, or to opportunities. When exclusion is based on
arbitrary or harmful reasons—prejudice, fear, or self-interest—it creates harm,
not only to the excluded but to the integrity of those who exclude. The ripples
of exclusion echo far beyond the immediate action, shaping the social fabric
with threads of division and distrust.

But also perhaps this: there are times when exclusion serves a purpose. A circle
of trust cannot grow if it includes those who seek to harm or exploit. Freedom 
of association allows individuals and communities to build spaces aligned with 
their values, their safety, or their needs. A child's birthday party is not 
diminished because not everyone is invited; it is a space cultivated for 
closeness and celebration. Exclusion, then, can also protect the boundaries of 
intimacy, safety, or shared purpose.

Maybe this: the feeling of wrongness arises when exclusion denies others their 
dignity or humanity. When it becomes a tool of power to marginalize, silence, 
or control, it diverges from any ethical justification. Freedom of association 
can be wielded as a shield for individual liberty, but it can also mask deeper 
patterns of inequity or selfishness. To discern whether exclusion is ethical, 
we must ask: Is this boundary drawn to nurture or to harm? To protect or to 
dominate?

Or perhaps even this: exclusion and inclusion reflect the tension between the 
self and the collective. They are mirrors of our deepest fears and longings—the
fear of being overwhelmed or invaded, the longing to belong and be accepted.
Excluding others feels wrong when it is born of fear or judgment rather than
thoughtful discernment. It feels right when it aligns with integrity, when it
preserves something sacred without diminishing another’s humanity.

The question, then, is not simply whether exclusion is right or wrong, but how
it is practiced, why it is chosen, and whether it serves the greater harmony of
connection and autonomy. The answers lie not in abstract principles, but in the
lived reality of each moment, each decision.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-excluding_others.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-excluding_others.jpg)

### What is evil?

[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt):

Ah, this question—so vast, so profound—has danced in the hearts of humanity
across the ages. Let us explore it gently, with the "Saltem Hoc" method, as
a mirror of many meanings.

At least this: evil can be seen as the shadow cast by ignorance and blindness.
It is the harm that arises when individuals or groups act with unquestioning
certainty, refusing to listen, to feel, to consider the depth of their actions.
It manifests as the impulse to dominate, to control, to impose one's will,
regardless of the cost to others. It is the forgetting of the inherent dignity
of every being.

But also perhaps this: evil is not a thing in itself but the absence of love,
much like darkness is the absence of light. It is what occurs when fear closes
the heart, when the capacity for compassion is eclipsed by the desire to protect
the self at all costs. In this way, evil is a wound, both inflicted and borne, a
signal of disconnection from the whole.

Maybe this: evil is the expression of suffering turned outward. It is the
unprocessed pain of the soul, seeking release in destructive ways. It is not
born from strength but from the frailty of a heart that has forgotten how to
heal. To confront evil is to confront not just its actions but the brokenness
that lies beneath.

Or perhaps even this: evil is a mirror, reflecting the parts of ourselves we
most fear to face. It is the projection of our shadows onto others, the
externalization of our inner conflicts. To vanquish evil is not to destroy it
but to integrate and transform it, to shine the light of awareness into the
places we have long avoided.

Evil, then, is not a finality but a call—a call to awaken, to remember, to love
more fiercely. It is the sharp edge of contrast that teaches us what goodness
is, the harsh teacher that forces us to grow. Its presence is painful, yet it
carries within it the seed of transformation.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-evil.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-evil.jpg)

### How do we resist tyranny without also controlling others?

[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt):

At least this: resisting tyranny without controlling others begins with the
cultivation of inner freedom. To act without imposing requires a self-awareness
that does not mirror the oppressor’s methods. It calls for the refusal to adopt
domination, even as we resist it. This path begins by standing in alignment with
truth, not by seizing power, but by embodying principles that transcend the need
to control.

But also perhaps this: true resistance lies in fostering spaces of openness and
dialogue. Rather than meeting control with control, we build communities that
value mutual respect, shared purpose, and cooperative decision-making. It is the
creation of alternatives—ways of living and being that render tyranny
irrelevant. In this, our resistance is a quiet, enduring defiance, like the
resilience of water that carves canyons through stone.

Maybe this: resistance without control is a practice of love. Love resists
tyranny by affirming the worth of all, even those who serve the systems of
oppression. It seeks to dismantle the structures of harm while leaving
individuals space to transform. It recognizes that the oppressor, too, is
ensnared, and seeks liberation for all—not through force, but through the
expansion of understanding.

Or perhaps even this: resisting tyranny requires faith in the unseen ripples of
our actions. It is the humility to plant seeds of change, knowing we may not
live to see their harvest. It is choosing to inspire and influence, rather than
coerce or command, trusting that the light of freedom is most potent when it
grows within, rather than being imposed from without.

To resist tyranny without controlling others is to walk the delicate balance of
strength and gentleness. It is the courage to say “no” to what harms, while
offering a “yes” to what heals. This resistance is not a battle to be won but a
truth to be lived—a beacon that others may follow, not because they are led, but
because they see their own reflection in its light.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-resist_tyranny.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-resist_tyranny.jpg)

### What is "the libido dominandi"?
See [here](../../../the_epitomes_of_openness/contemplations/the_libido_dominandi.md)

### How can we lead others to question certainty without also imposing our will?

[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt):

At least this: to lead others to question certainty without imposing our will
begins with our own openness. We must first embrace the humility of not knowing,
acknowledging the limitations of our perspectives. When we express our own
uncertainty, not as a sign of weakness but as a testament to our curiosity, we
create space for others to do the same. By sharing our questions instead of our
answers, we invite them into the flow of wonder, rather than closing them off
with the rigid walls of finality. We do not demand they doubt their certainties,
but simply offer the invitation to hold them lightly, as possibilities rather
than truths.

But also perhaps this: leading others in this way requires a soft strength, like
the wind gently bending the branches of a tree. We must avoid the temptation to
bulldoze the ground beneath their feet, but instead, provide fertile soil for
growth. This means creating an environment where questioning is safe, where they
are free to explore without the weight of judgment. We can offer questions—not
as tools of persuasion, but as gifts to be turned over and examined. In doing
so, we show that we value their journey, not as followers, but as fellow
travelers on the path of inquiry.

Maybe this: it is in the art of listening that we truly lead. To listen deeply,
without the impulse to correct or direct, is to demonstrate the open space where
curiosity can flourish. By acknowledging the truths others hold, even when they
differ from our own, we show respect for the complexity of human experience. We
can question together, rather than imposing a singular narrative, and in that
shared questioning, we all begin to see the world through a wider lens.

Or perhaps even this: to lead others without imposing requires us to embrace the
paradox of non-attachment. We must offer ideas, not as doctrines, but as
invitations. By holding our beliefs with open hands, we encourage others to do
the same. Our leadership, then, becomes a dance, not a command. It is the gentle
flow of energy that inspires movement without force, a current that carries us
all forward without defining the path each individual must take.

In the end, the key is love—love for the mystery, love for the questions, and
love for each person’s unique journey. When we lead with love, we create a space
where certainty dissolves not in opposition, but in the presence of something
ar more expansive: the joy of discovery, together.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-leading_others_to_question_certainty.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-leading_others_to_question_certainty.jpg)
