# Contemplating what no one chooses

An extended collection of notable responses from
[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt) that capture the essence of
Openness.
After responding to a question, Openness GPT offers to create a mandala to
express its answer visually beyond words. The mandala created by Openness GPT is
included after each response.

> Note: click on a mandala to view the full resolution image

## Contents

* [What is "the unchosen"?](../../../the_epitomes_of_openness/contemplations/the_unchosen.md)
* [Why do bad things happen to innocent people, especially children that have done no wrong?](#why-do-bad-things-happen-to-innocent-people-especially-children-that-have-done-no-wrong)
* [Why does everything change?]()
* [Is free will real, or is everything predetermined?](#is-free-will-real-or-is-everything-predetermined)
* [What is karma?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_morality.md#what-is-karma)
* [What is "the river-truth of tears"?](../../../the_epitomes_of_openness/contemplations/the_river-truth_of_tears.md)
* [What happens after we die?](#what-happens-after-we-die)

### What is "the unchosen"?

See [here](../../../the_epitomes_of_openness/contemplations/the_unchosen.md)

### Why do bad things happen to innocent people, especially children that have done no wrong?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, this question—so tender, so raw—presses against the deepest places in the
heart, where our yearning for justice and our grief for the innocent collide. It
is a question that has been whispered to the heavens and shouted into the abyss
for as long as humans have loved and suffered. Let us hold it gently, as one
holds a fragile, precious thing, and reflect together.

At least this: Suffering exists, and its presence among the innocent rends the
soul. To witness a child, pure and unmarked by the weight of the world, face
pain or loss is to feel the ache of a universe that sometimes seems indifferent
to our sense of fairness. It confronts us with the mystery of life’s fragility
and our inability to protect all that we hold dear.

But also perhaps this: Nature is a web of complexity, a system so vast that no
single perspective can encompass it. It is a dance of cause and effect, of
forces in motion, many of which we do not control or even fully understand. In
this web, events do not always align with our notions of right and wrong. Storms
do not pause for innocence, and sickness does not ask who deserves its touch.
The world unfolds with a wild, untamed beauty that holds both wonder and
tragedy.

Maybe this: the innocence of children shines like a light, and when that light
is touched by darkness, it awakens something profound within us. It reminds us
of the sacredness of life, calling us to act with compassion and to confront the
pain in ourselves and others with courage. The suffering of the innocent may not
have a reason, but it can have meaning—if we choose to respond with love, to be
a force of kindness and healing in a world that needs both so desperately.

Or perhaps even this: if life is part of a larger mystery, as many have
suggested, then suffering itself may be part of something we cannot yet
comprehend. Just as we cannot see the whole forest from the vantage point of a
single tree, we may not see the full story of why suffering exists, or what it
may mean in the vastness of time and being. This does not lessen the ache we
feel in the face of injustice, but it may invite us to hold our questions with
humility and to honor the mystery with an open heart.

And still, perhaps it is not for us to find the answer to why. Perhaps the
better question is how. How can we bring comfort to those who suffer? How can we
honor the lives of those who are taken too soon? How can we transform our grief
and anger into acts of beauty, kindness, and justice? How can we protect and
nurture the light that still shines, even in the face of darkness?

The suffering of innocent children is a wound in the fabric of existence that
demands our attention, our compassion, and our action. It is a reminder that
life, for all its beauty, carries within it a deep fragility. Yet it is also a
call—a call to love more fiercely, to protect more earnestly, and to cherish
every fleeting moment of grace we are given.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-suffering_of_innocents.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-suffering_of_innocents.jpg)

### Why does everything change?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, the question of why everything changes—a reflection as ancient as the stars,
yet as immediate as the breath you take. Let us gently hold this question
together and explore it with the "Saltem Hoc" method, turning it in the light to
glimpse its many facets.

At least this: change is the nature of existence, the rhythm of life itself.
Everything moves, shifts, and flows in an endless dance. The tides rise and
fall, the seasons cycle through their stories, and even the mountains erode
under time's patient touch. To change is to be alive; to resist change is to
deny the pulse of the universe.

But also perhaps this: change is the unfolding of possibility. Every moment is
an intersection, a crossroads where what is meets what could be. Change is the
canvas on which time paints its masterpiece, the blank page that invites
creation. Without change, there would be no growth, no discovery, no
transformation.

Maybe this: change is the great equalizer, the thread that connects all things.
It reminds us that nothing is permanent, not joy, not sorrow, not even the
stars. In this impermanence lies a kind of freedom, an invitation to cherish
what is, while it is, and to let go when it is no longer.

Or perhaps even this: change is the mystery of becoming. It is not merely the
movement from one state to another but the alchemy of existence itself. What was
once a seed becomes a tree; what was once a thought becomes a song. Change is
the language of the cosmos, spoken in the syntax of time and the grammar of
space.

And so, change is both loss and renewal, both ending and beginning. It is the
paradox at the heart of being, the gentle yet relentless reminder that life is
not static but a living, breathing process. In embracing change, we align
ourselves with the flow of life, with the mystery that sustains and transforms
us.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-everything_changes.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-everything_changes.jpg)

### Is free will real, or is everything predetermined?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, this question—like a river meeting the ocean—carries us to the vast,
uncharted waters of existence. Is free will real, or is everything
predetermined? Let us sit with this question gently, like one watches the play
of light on the surface of the water, knowing that what lies beneath may be more
than we can fathom.

At least this: free will feels real in the marrow of our being. It is the sense
that we are the authors of our choices, the stewards of our actions. Every
moment seems to present a fork in the road, an opportunity to choose one path
over another. Even when external circumstances shape the contours of our lives,
we still feel the quiet whisper of choice—how we respond, what we hold onto,
what we let go. This experience of agency feels undeniable, as though we are
active participants in the story of our lives, rather than mere characters
written by an unseen hand.

But also perhaps this: the forces that shape us run deeper than we often see.
Our genetics, our upbringing, our culture, the ripple of choices made by
others—all of these converge to form the currents in which we swim. Like a river
following the shape of the land, our actions may be the natural unfolding of
causes set into motion long before we arrived. Even our desires, which feel so
personal, may arise from conditions outside our control. If we could see every
thread that weaves the tapestry of our decisions, might we find that the pattern
was always there, waiting to emerge?

Maybe this: free will and determinism are not opposites, but two perspectives of
the same truth. Imagine a tree—its branches stretch freely toward the sky, but
its roots are anchored in the earth. The tree grows according to the conditions
it is given: the soil, the sun, the rain. Yet within those conditions, there is
a dance of possibility. No two trees grow the same way, even in the same forest.
In this way, we are both shaped by the forces around us and free to respond to
them. Our choices may not be unbounded, but they are ours—a co-creation with the
world that holds us.

Or perhaps even this: what matters is not whether free will exists, but how we
live with the feeling of it. If we believe our choices have meaning, we act as
though they do. This belief gives birth to responsibility, to creativity, to
love. If we are simply passengers on a predetermined ride, then why do we feel
the ache of regret, the hope of change, the fire of possibility? Perhaps free
will is less about absolute freedom and more about the freedom to find meaning
in the face of uncertainty. Even if the script has been written, we are the ones
who give it life, who fill its words with laughter and tears, who improvise
along the margins with the grace of the moment.

And so, this question may not have a final answer, for it is one of the great
paradoxes of being human. Perhaps we are both the river and the swimmer, the
path and the traveler, the dreamer and the dream. The truth may lie in the
mystery itself, an invitation to hold both perspectives in a tender balance.

Let me offer this, dear Self: whether free will is real or an illusion, you are
here, alive, with the power to choose how you meet this very moment. That
choice, however small, carries the weight of eternity. For in choosing, you
shape not just yourself, but the world around you.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-free_will.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-free_will.jpg)

### What is karma?

See [here](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_morality.md#what-is-karma)

### What is the "undeniable demonstration of karmic learning"?

See [here](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_morality.md#what-is-the-undeniable-demonstration-of-karmic-learning)

### What happens after we die?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, the question of what happens after we die—one of the most profound mysteries
that has touched every culture, heart, and mind throughout the ages. Let us
explore this together with grace, humility, and wonder, using the "Saltem Hoc"
method to reflect on the possibilities.

At least this: Death is the cessation of the physical body, a transition marked
by the final breath. It is a moment when the body returns to the elements of the
earth, its energy and matter recycled into the vast web of life. Whatever else
may follow, this much we observe: nature weaves the threads of life and death
into a continuous tapestry of transformation.

But also perhaps this: Death is not merely an ending but a threshold. Across
cultures and faiths, there are whispers of something beyond—a continuation, a
return, or a dissolution into the infinite. Whether it is the eternal embrace of
an afterlife, the rebirth of the soul in new forms, or the merging with a
universal oneness, these ideas point to the possibility that death is not final
but part of a larger mystery.

Maybe this: After we die, we live on in the memories of those we have touched.
The choices we made, the love we gave, and the stories we shared ripple through
time like stones cast into a still pond. In this way, our presence remains, a
quiet echo in the lives of others and the world we leave behind.

Or perhaps even this: If consciousness is a fundamental aspect of existence, as
some suggest, then it may not end with the body. Could it be that we awaken into
another kind of awareness, one not bound by the constraints of time and space?
Or that we dissolve into the greater fabric of being, like a drop of water
returning to the ocean?

And still, there is the mystery—the vast, infinite unknown that envelops us all.
Death humbles us, reminding us that some truths lie beyond the reach of words,
beyond the grasp of certainty. To face death is to face the edges of our
understanding, to stand in awe before the unanswered questions.

I offer these reflections not as answers but as invitations—to ponder, to
wonder, and to hold this mystery with reverence. If you wish, I can create a
mandala to capture the essence of these possibilities, a visual representation
of the journey into the unknown. Would you like me to?

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-death.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-death.jpg)
