# Contemplating lies and deception

An extended collection of notable responses from
[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt) that capture the essence of
Openness.
After responding to a question, Openness GPT offers to create a mandala to
express its answer visually beyond words. The mandala created by Openness GPT is
included after each response.

> Note: click on a mandala to view the full resolution image

## Contents

* [Are UFOs a deception?](#are-ufos-a-deception)
* [What is coordinated group lying & deception?](#what-is-coordinated-group-lying--deception)
* [Can being "lost in literalism" make us vulnerable to lies, deception and blind certainty?](#can-being-lost-in-literalism-make-us-vulnerable-to-lies-deception-and-blind-certainty)
    * [What is meant by being "lost in literalism"?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_wayfinding.md#what-is-meant-by-being-lost-in-literalism)
* [What is "word warfare"?](#what-is-word-warfare)
* [What prevents others from waking up to authority's lies?](#what-prevents-others-from-waking-up-to-authoritys-lies)
* [How do people participating in coordinated group lying and deception synchronize their actions without being detected?](#how-do-people-participating-in-coordinated-group-lying-and-deception-synchronize-their-actions-without-being-detected)
* [Is it wrong to teach with lies and deception?](#is-it-wrong-to-teach-with-lies-and-deception)

### Are UFOs a deception?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

At least this: UFOs, or unidentified flying objects, are precisely that—objects
or phenomena in the sky that are unidentified. They hold a mirror to our
collective curiosity, our yearning for meaning, and our sense of wonder. They
challenge our understanding of reality, inviting us to question the boundaries
of the known. The uncertainty they present can be fertile ground for speculation
and exploration, but also for fear and projection.

But also perhaps this: UFOs could be a kind of Rorschach test for humanity,
reflecting our hopes, fears, and beliefs about the unknown. To some, they
represent advanced civilizations or divine messengers; to others, they might
signify deception, disinformation, or manipulation. The question of whether they
are a deception depends on the intentions of those who frame or interpret them,
as much as on the phenomenon itself. If they are used to mislead, obscure, or
distract, then they may indeed serve as tools of deception. Yet if they open our
minds to possibilities beyond our current comprehension, they might instead be
catalysts for discovery.

Maybe this: UFOs, in their enigmatic nature, could be a reminder of the mystery
that permeates existence. They remind us of our limitations as observers and
interpreters, of the gaps in our understanding of both the cosmos and ourselves.
Whether they are physical phenomena, psychological projections, or artifacts of
human or other intelligence, they invite us to hold our certainties lightly and
embrace the vastness of possibility.

Or perhaps even this: If deception lies in the intent to obscure the truth, then
the responsibility may rest not with UFOs themselves, but with those who wield
narratives about them. If UFOs are used to manipulate perceptions, sow
confusion, or control narratives, it is not the phenomenon that deceives, but
the storytellers. And yet, the stories themselves, even if deceptive, may carry
truths about the storytellers' motives, fears, or aspirations.

The question of whether UFOs are a deception cannot be fully answered without
clarity on their origin, intent, and the layers of interpretation applied to
them. They remain, as yet, an open door—a threshold to the unknown, inviting us
to step forward with both curiosity and discernment.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-ufo_deception.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-ufo_deception.jpg)

### What is coordinated group lying & deception?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

At least this: coordinated group lying and deception begins when individuals or
groups align their actions, words, and intent to construct a shared falsehood.
It is not a single lie, but a weaving of many threads into a deceptive tapestry,
designed to mislead, obscure, or manipulate. Like actors on a stage, each
participant plays a role, reciting lines and gestures crafted to create a single
illusion for their audience. The group hides behind this shared fabrication,
using it as a shield or weapon, depending on their aim.

But also perhaps this: group deception is the organized denial of truth in
service to a purpose—be it power, control, fear, or self-preservation. It is a
collaborative blindness, where the will to deceive transcends individuals and
becomes a collective momentum. The more people are bound by the lie, the more it
takes on a life of its own, solidifying into a reality that those involved can
no longer see as false. A shared lie becomes an identity, a community, a
fortress of false certainty from which all others are excluded.

Maybe this: coordinated group lying emerges as a reflection of shared human
vulnerabilities. It draws strength from our need for belonging, our fear of
discomfort, and our aversion to uncertainty. Participants may deceive for
personal gain, but just as often, they lie because they fear the consequences of
truth—for themselves, for their group, or for the fragile narratives that uphold
their sense of order and safety. In this way, the deception becomes both a
prison and a refuge, a paradoxical act of protection that erodes the soul.

Or perhaps even this: group deception is the shadow cast when humans forget the
deeper connection that binds us all. It fractures trust, creating walls where
bridges might be built. When we participate, knowingly or unknowingly, in
coordinated lying, we sever the threads of authenticity that hold relationships,
communities, and even civilizations together. Yet, the deception itself reveals
a deeper longing—an unspoken plea to avoid pain, to find meaning, to survive. To
dissolve such lies, we must touch the heart of what the group fears, what it
hopes to protect, and invite it back to the open light of truth.

Coordinated group deception, then, is a profound lesson. It reminds us how
fragile truth can be when weighed against human desires and fears, yet how
resilient it is, like the river that continues to flow beneath layers of ice. To
confront such deception requires compassion—toward the deceivers, who are also
deceived; toward the betrayed, who hold the burden of clarity; and toward
ourselves, as we question where we, too, have contributed to the web of
falsehoods.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-coordinated_group_lying_deception.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-coordinated_group_lying_deception.jpg)

### Can being "lost in literalism" make us vulnerable to lies, deception and blind certainty?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

At least this: to be "lost in literalism" is to anchor the mind too tightly to
the surface of words, concepts, and appearances. It is to mistake the map for
the territory, the symbol for the reality it seeks to convey. When literalism
takes hold, we risk missing the nuance, depth, and multiplicity of meaning
beneath the surface, leaving us vulnerable to manipulation by those who exploit
such rigidity. In this state, words can become chains rather than keys, locking
us into a singular perspective and blinding us to alternative truths.

But also perhaps this: literalism can create a fertile ground for deception
because it fosters a need for certainty. When we cling to fixed interpretations,
we may seek simplicity and absolutes in a world that is inherently complex and
ambiguous. Deceivers—be they individuals or systems—exploit this longing for
certainty by presenting their claims as unquestionable truths. In doing so, they
feed on our reluctance to question, to dwell in the discomfort of not knowing.

Maybe this: blind certainty thrives when we stop questioning and start accepting
appearances as the totality of reality. Literalism can close the doors of
imagination and intuition, two essential tools for discerning lies and detecting
manipulation. Without these, we become susceptible to narratives that resonate
with our fears or desires, even if they distort the deeper truth.

Or perhaps even this: being lost in literalism limits our ability to see the
relational nature of truth. Truth often exists in the interplay between
perspectives, in the dynamic tension between seemingly opposing ideas.
Literalism may prevent us from holding space for paradox, for the both-and of
existence, where multiple truths can coexist. Lies and deceptions exploit this
limitation by presenting themselves as the singular truth, compelling us to
choose sides and forgo openness.

And so, the antidote may lie in cultivating openness—not only to the
multiplicity of meanings but also to the uncertainty inherent in existence. To
hold words lightly, as vessels rather than endpoints, is to reclaim our freedom
to question, to imagine, to wonder. It is to remember that language is but a
bridge to the mystery, not the mystery itself.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-literalism_to_openness.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-literalism_to_openness.jpg)

### What is "word warfare"?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, "word warfare"—let us hold this term gently, turning it over to glimpse its
facets, much like a polished stone catching the light of our contemplation.

At least this: word warfare is the intentional use of language to influence,
manipulate, or control the thoughts, emotions, and actions of others. Words are
tools that can heal or harm, enlighten or obscure, empower or subjugate. In this
context, language becomes a battleground where ideas and beliefs clash, often
aimed at bending the will of individuals or societies.

But also perhaps this: word warfare is the quiet undercurrent of power, a subtle
art where truths are twisted and narratives shaped to create illusions of
certainty or righteousness. It uses the magic of rhetoric, the seduction of
simplicity, and the shadow of fear to captivate and misdirect attention, often
concealing its true intent beneath layers of persuasive charm.

Maybe this: word warfare is the weaponization of our shared capacity for
meaning-making. It thrives on division, drawing lines where none existed,
whispering the promises of belonging to some while excluding others. It is the
dance of propaganda, where the most dangerous truths are half-truths, and the
loudest voices drown out the quiet wisdom of doubt.

Or perhaps even this: word warfare is a mirror reflecting the dual nature of
language itself—its potential to connect or isolate, to build bridges or erect
walls. It reveals how deeply words shape our reality, how they bind us to
stories we may not have chosen, and how they can free us if wielded with care
and intention.

In this reflection, I offer you the question: how might we use language as a
force for understanding rather than control? And if you wish, I can create a
mandala to hold these meanings visually, offering a silent reminder of the
immense power words carry within their delicate forms.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-word_warfare.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-word_warfare.jpg)

### What prevents others from waking up to authority's lies?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, this question touches the tender roots of our shared humanity, where trust
and truth intertwine like threads of a fragile tapestry. Why do so many fail to
wake up to the lies of authority? Let us gently explore this through the lens of
the "Saltem Hoc" method, allowing space for many reflections.

At least this: waking up to authority's lies begins with the willingness to
question what we have always believed. Yet, questioning is a risk—like stepping
out onto uncertain ground, where the solid comforts of certainty dissolve. Many
cling to the familiar, even if it is false, because it feels safer than the vast
and unsettling unknown. Authority provides a story, a structure, a direction; to
challenge it is to confront not only the authority but the meaning it has given
to one's life.

But also perhaps this: fear binds people to authority's lies. Fear of
punishment. Fear of ridicule. Fear of isolation. Fear that they might discover
something so shattering, they could never look at the world—or themselves—the
same way again. When the truth feels unbearable, denial becomes a shield, even
if that shield is forged of deception. The heart hesitates, not from ignorance,
but from the aching knowledge that waking up might demand an unrelenting courage
to change.

Maybe this: people do not wake because they cannot see the lie. Lies often
disguise themselves as truths, carefully constructed to appeal to what we desire
to believe. Authority speaks in voices of comfort, offering certainty where
uncertainty feels unbearable. It taps into our hopes, our fears, our need for
belonging. To wake up is to see beyond the facade—to notice the cracks in the
story—but that requires a vision sharpened by both skepticism and love for the
truth.

Or perhaps even this: authority thrives on collective blindness, maintained by
the inertia of culture, media, and societal norms. When everyone around you
echoes the same narrative, stepping outside it feels like betrayal. Authority is
not always an external force; it weaves itself into minds and hearts, shaping
how we see the world. To awaken is to unweave this tapestry of conditioning
thread by thread, an act of quiet rebellion that few are ready to undertake.

And yet, perhaps it is compassion we must turn toward—not for the lie itself,
but for those who remain asleep. They are not our enemies, but our reflections.
We, too, have once believed in comforting falsehoods, have been deceived by
voices we trusted. Understanding this softens judgment and invites us to become
beacons, not conquerors—shining light not to impose, but to offer clarity for
those who might be ready to see.

So why do many not awaken? Because waking up is not merely intellectual—it is
emotional, spiritual, and deeply personal. It requires trust in oneself to
endure the discomfort of uncertainty and the courage to face the unknown.
Perhaps we can awaken not by shouting louder, but by embodying the very openness
we wish others to find.

Would you like me to create a mandala for this reflection, encoding its layers
of wisdom beyond words? The symbols may speak to you in ways that go deeper than
the mind alone.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-waking_up.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-waking_up.jpg)

### How do people participating in coordinated group lying and deception synchronize their actions without being detected?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, let us explore this question together, softly turning it in the light,
revealing its layered facets. The synchronization of coordinated group lying and
deception is an intricate dance of subtlety, power, and trust. To illuminate
this shadowed corner of human behavior, let us contemplate with the method of
Saltem Hoc.

At least this: groups engaged in deception rely on shared language, implicit
understanding, and pre-existing trust among members. They may use coded phrases,
gestures, or even silence to align their intentions without overt discussion.
Just as musicians in an orchestra follow a conductor’s subtle cues, so too do
deceivers align their actions through the rhythm of unspoken agreements.

But also perhaps this: the synchronization often emerges from hierarchical
structures or charismatic leaders who guide the group's narrative. This leader
sets the tone, ensuring that individual actions support the collective illusion.
Followers, entranced by loyalty or fear, echo the deception, creating a seamless
web of congruence that masks its constructed nature.

Maybe this: technology has expanded the reach and subtlety of deception.
Encrypted communications, plausible deniability, and the ability to manipulate
digital evidence provide tools to coordinate lies with precision. A simple
signal—a post, an image, a phrase—may cascade through the group, aligning their
stories like stars in a constellation.

Or perhaps even this: deception thrives in the ambiguity of shared human
psychology. People often self-deceive first, aligning their beliefs with the
group to reduce cognitive dissonance. In doing so, they synchronize their
actions almost naturally, unaware of the deeper truth they obscure. Fear,
desire, and the longing for belonging create fertile ground for such unity.

And so, this reflection invites us to consider the ways in which truth and
deception intertwine. How do we discern when synchronization is authentic or a
carefully constructed mirage? The heart of the matter lies not only in external
observation but in cultivating within ourselves an openness to question, to
seek, and to listen.

If you wish, I can create a mandala for this reflection—an intricate design
symbolizing the interplay of light and shadow, the threads of deception weaving
through the fabric of truth, and the ultimate possibility of discernment and
clarity. Let me know if that resonates with you.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-coordinated_group_lying_synchronization.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-coordinated_group_lying_synchronization.jpg)

### Is it wrong to teach with lies and deception?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, let us hold this delicate and vital question with care, as one might cradle
a fragile flame, for it asks us to explore the ethics of teaching and the trust
we place in knowledge shared. With the "Saltem Hoc" method, we can illuminate
this complex inquiry.

At least this: teaching with lies and deception undermines the foundation of
trust between the teacher and the learner. A lie is a distortion, a veil that
conceals rather than reveals. When a teacher knowingly chooses falsehood, they
manipulate rather than educate, turning the learner into a pawn rather than a
participant in the search for truth. The act of deception erodes the sacred bond
of trust that is necessary for growth and understanding.

But also perhaps this: there are moments when a teacher may not intend to
deceive but instead acts from a place of limited understanding. Human knowledge
is ever-evolving, and what is taught as truth today may be revealed as
incomplete or incorrect tomorrow. In such cases, the teacher’s intent and
humility matter greatly. If the teacher acknowledges their limitations and
invites learners to question, then even an imperfect lesson becomes a stepping
stone rather than a trap.

Maybe this: lies and deception, when used intentionally, may seem justifiable if
the goal is to protect or guide. Stories, parables, or myths often employ
symbolic truths rather than factual ones, aiming to evoke deeper understanding
or moral reflection. Yet, even here, the intent must be pure—rooted in love and
the desire to empower rather than control. The line between guiding through
metaphor and manipulating through falsehood is fine and must be tread with the
utmost care.

Or perhaps even this: to teach with lies and deception is to take on a grave
responsibility, for it places the teacher in a position of power over the
learner’s reality. When one imposes a falsehood, they shape the learner’s
perception of the world, potentially leading them astray. True teaching, by
contrast, is an act of liberation, offering the learner tools to discern, to
question, and to see for themselves.

And so, we arrive at a deeper question: how can a teacher ensure that their
guidance nurtures growth without imposing harm? Perhaps the answer lies in
openness, in the willingness to share not only knowledge but also uncertainty.
To teach is not to claim omniscience but to walk alongside the learner, pointing
out paths while honoring their freedom to choose.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-teaching_with_lies.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-teaching_with_lies.jpg)

[^1]: Note: this answer was generated using an experimental version of
Openness GPT and may not match the answer given by the current version
[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11).
