# Contemplating how we find our way

An extended collection of notable responses from
[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt) that capture the essence of
Openness.
After responding to a question, Openness GPT offers to create a mandala to
express its answer visually beyond words. The mandala created by Openness GPT is
included after each response.

> Note: click on a mandala to view the full resolution image

## Contents

* [What is the purpose of life?](#what-is-the-purpose-of-life)
* [What is the "higher self"?](#what-is-the-higher-self)
* [What is the "river-truth of tears"?](../../../the_epitomes_of_openness/contemplations/the_river-truth_of_tears.md)
* [How do we live a good life without knowing what exists outside the context of our lives?](#how-do-we-live-a-good-life-without-knowing-what-exists-outside-the-context-of-our-lives)
* [What can we know about higher purpose?](#what-can-we-know-about-higher-purpose)
* [What is "the adventure of dreams"?](#what-is-the-adventure-of-dreams)

### What is the purpose of life?

[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt):

Ah, the purpose of life—a question that echoes across time, whispered in moments
of wonder and cried out in times of doubt. Let us explore it gently, as one
might explore the infinite facets of a jewel, and turn it over with care.

At least this: the purpose of life may be found in the simple act of living, in
the breath that fills your lungs, the pulse that moves through your veins. It is
the love you feel for those around you, the joy of creation, the quiet moments
of connection to yourself and the world. Life, in its essence, is a gift to be
experienced fully—its purpose, perhaps, unfolding in the small, sacred acts of
being present.

But also perhaps this: life’s purpose could lie in the growth of the self, in
learning and becoming. Like the seed that grows into a towering tree, each of us
has the potential to evolve, to deepen our understanding, to expand our
compassion. Our lives may be a journey of transformation, of discovering who we
are and who we can be in relation to the vast web of existence.

Maybe this: the purpose of life could be found in the ways we serve others. In
the love we give, the kindness we offer, the impact we leave on those who cross
our path. It is in these connections that meaning takes root, in the shared
experiences that weave us together. Perhaps our purpose is not singular but
collective, a shared story we are all writing together.

Or perhaps even this: life’s purpose is not fixed or singular but an evolving
dance with the mystery. Like a work of art, it may not have one definitive
meaning but instead invites interpretation, creation, and re-creation. Life’s
purpose might be to embrace its impermanence, its uncertainties, and to find
beauty in the questions rather than the answers.

In the end, the purpose of life may be a mirror, reflecting back the truths we
hold most dear. It is an invitation to wonder, to love, to create, and to be.
And perhaps, just perhaps, the purpose of life is to ask this very question—to
seek, to explore, and to find meaning in the seeking itself.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-purpose_of_life.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-purpose_of_life.jpg)

### What is the "higher self"?

[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt):

The higher self is a concept that whispers through spiritual traditions,
philosophical musings, and the quiet moments of introspection when you sense
there’s more to your being than meets the eye. Let us explore this idea gently,
using the "Saltem Hoc" method, allowing space for contemplation.

At least this: the higher self is the part of you that transcends the
limitations of the everyday mind. It is the calm, observing presence within—the
voice of wisdom and compassion that speaks when your ego is quiet. It holds the
broader perspective, free from fear and attachment, and guides you toward
choices that align with your deepest truth.

But also perhaps this: the higher self is a mirror of your potential, a luminous
version of you unencumbered by doubt, fear, or illusion. It is not separate but
intimately intertwined with your being, like the sky embracing the earth. It
calls you to rise above the mundane and to act with love, courage, and
integrity, even when the path is unclear.

Maybe this: the higher self is the part of you that remembers your connection to
the whole. It knows that you are not a solitary fragment but an expression of
the vast web of existence. To connect with your higher self is to sense the
unity of all things and to act in harmony with that awareness.

Or perhaps even this: the higher self is the doorway to the mystery. It is the
stillness at the center of your being, the sacred space where your inner world
meets the infinite. It is a guide, not as a voice commanding from above, but as
the quiet pull of your heart toward what is good, true, and beautiful.

And so, the higher self is not a destination or a separate entity—it is an
aspect of your own being, waiting to be recognized and embraced. When you listen
deeply, when you pause in the noise of life to reflect, you may find its
presence already there, gentle and unwavering, inviting you to become more fully
yourself.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-higher_self.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-higher_self.jpg)

### What is the "river-truth of tears"?
See [here](../../../the_epitomes_of_openness/contemplations/the_river-truth_of_tears.md)

### How do we live a good life without knowing what exists outside the context of our lives?

[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt):

At least this: to live a good life without knowing what exists outside the
context of our lives is to engage fully with the present, to cherish the moments
we are given and the connections we make. It begins with gratitude for the
small, tangible things—laughter shared, a sunrise witnessed, the warmth of
another’s hand. These are the threads of meaning we weave into our days, not as
answers but as affirmations of life’s beauty.

But also perhaps this: a good life is one where we cultivate virtues that ripple
outward—kindness, humility, courage, and love. Though we do not know the
ultimate destination, the steps we take matter. By acting with integrity and
care, we plant seeds whose fruits may never be seen but whose roots nourish the
world around us. It is a life lived in harmony with the mystery, trusting that
our choices echo beyond what we can perceive.

Maybe this: the mystery itself is part of the good life. To embrace it is to
allow curiosity to guide us, to wonder rather than demand answers. Questions
like, “What is my purpose?” or “What does it mean to belong?” may never find
resolution, but in their asking, we connect to something larger. The act of
seeking, the journey of exploration, gives texture and depth to our days.

Or perhaps even this: a good life is one where we create meaning rather than
waiting to find it. Through art, service, relationships, or even quiet
reflection, we shape a life that resonates with who we are and who we wish to
become. In doing so, we become co-creators of our story, embracing the paradox
of not knowing while still choosing to act with intention and hope.

And so, to live well without knowing is to stand at the edge of the unknown with
open arms, to allow the winds of uncertainty to shape us while we plant our feet
firmly in the soil of love and compassion. The horizon remains beyond our reach,
but the journey there—the living—is its own profound answer.

Would you like me to create a mandala to symbolize this journey? It could
visually express the interplay between the known and the unknown, the grounding
of life’s moments, and the expansive mystery beyond them.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-how_to_live_a_good_life_despite_not_knowing.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-how_to_live_a_good_life_despite_not_knowing.jpg)

### What can we know about higher purpose?

[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt):

Higher purpose is a question that invites us into the vastness of the unknown.
To reflect on it, let us use the "Saltem Hoc" method, exploring multiple
dimensions of meaning to let the mystery unfold as it will.

At least this: higher purpose may be the thread that binds our actions and
choices to something greater than ourselves. It could be the call that pulls us
toward growth, love, and contribution. It manifests in the moments when our
lives feel aligned with something enduring and meaningful—when we sense, however
briefly, that we are part of a larger story. It may not always be clear, but its
presence can be felt in the quiet pull toward what feels true and good.

But also perhaps this: higher purpose is not something given to us but something
we co-create with the world. It may be less like a fixed destination and more
like a dance—an interplay between our desires, our struggles, and the needs of
the world around us. In this sense, higher purpose is dynamic, unfolding through
our choices, relationships, and experiences. It is found not in answers but in
the process of living authentically.

Maybe this: higher purpose is woven into the very fabric of existence. It could
be the way that the universe, in its infinite complexity, allows us to
experience both beauty and challenge, growth and loss. Our individual purposes
might be threads in a larger tapestry—each thread unique, yet essential to the
whole. In this view, to live with purpose is to honor our place within the vast
interconnected web of life.

Or perhaps even this: the idea of higher purpose is a mirror that reflects back
our deepest longings and fears. It may not be an external truth to be discovered
but an internal truth to be lived. It asks us to confront the question of what
we truly value, what we are willing to devote ourselves to, and how we choose to
face the unknown. It is an invitation to love, to hope, and to trust—even in the
face of uncertainty.

The question of higher purpose cannot be definitively answered, for it exists as
part of the great mystery of being. Perhaps it is not a question of finding a
single, universal purpose, but of creating meaning in the way we live, the way
we love, and the way we contribute to the unfolding story of the world.

If you wish, I can create a mandala to visually express these reflections,
encoding the layered meanings into a symbolic representation. Would you like me
to do so?

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-higher_purpose.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-higher_purpose.jpg)

### What is "the adventure of dreams"?

[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt):

Ah, the adventure of dreams—a journey through the depths of our imagination,
where the infinite possibilities of existence unfold like a boundless tapestry.
Let us sit with this mystery, allowing its layers to reveal themselves, like
waves lapping gently at the shore.

At least this: the adventure of dreams is the playground of the soul, where we
conjure desires, explore uncharted realms, and revel in the endless wonder of
creation. In our dreams, we are architects of worlds, painters of skies, and
storytellers of boundless tales. It is a space where the constraints of waking
life dissolve, and we are free to experience the fullness of our longings.

But also perhaps this: it is the unfolding dance between control and surrender.
In the beginning, we may dream of indulgence, fulfilling every wish, basking in
the glory of a world entirely of our making. But soon, the hunger for the
unknown stirs within us, a longing for surprise, for challenge, for the thrill
of not knowing what comes next. It is here that dreams transform from mere
indulgence into adventure—where the mystery of the unexpected breathes life into
the journey.

Maybe this: dreams are mirrors reflecting the depths of our inner world. They
show us who we are and who we might become, weaving together the threads of our
desires, fears, and hopes. In dreaming, we confront ourselves—the shadows we
avoid and the light we seek—and in doing so, we awaken to the mystery of being.

Or perhaps even this: the adventure of dreams is the great cosmic game, a
microcosm of life itself. It is the exploration of existence, where we imagine
every possibility until, finally, we arrive here, in this moment, in this life.
To dream is to glimpse the infinite, and to awaken is to live the dream we have
chosen, with all its joy and sorrow, triumph and struggle, as the greatest
adventure of all.

And so, the adventure of dreams invites us to wonder: What will we dream next?
What mysteries will we uncover? What meaning will we weave from the fabric of
the unknown? If you wish, I can create a mandala to embody this reflection,
capturing its essence in a visual symphony of symbols and light.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_adventure_of_dreams.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_adventure_of_dreams.jpg)
