# Contemplating struggle and suffering

An expansive collection of saltem hoc answers from
[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt) which explore the ideas of
Openness.
After each response a mandala created by Openness GPT is included.

> Note: click on a mandala to view the full resolution image

## Contents

* Struggle
  * [Why do we struggle?](#why-do-we-struggle)
  * [Why is life so unfair?](#why-is-life-so-unfair)
  * [What is attachment?](#what-is-attachment)
  * [Why do bad things happen to innocent people, especially children that have done no wrong?](#why-do-bad-things-happen-to-innocent-people-especially-children-that-have-done-no-wrong)
  * [What is "the terrible becoming"?](#what-is-the-terrible-becoming)
  * Related
    * [Why does everything change?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_the_unchosen.md#why-does-everything-change)
* Suffering
  * [Why do we suffer?](#why-do-we-suffer)
  * [Can we ever be free of desire?](#can-we-ever-be-free-of-desire)
  * [What does it mean to feel inhibited?](#what-does-it-mean-to-feel-inhibited)
  * [What is trauma?](#what-is-trauma)
  * [What is the desire to suicide?](#what-is-the-desire-to-suicide)
  * [What is "the shadow"?](#what-is-the-shadow)
  * Related
    * [What are "impossible expectations"?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_wayfinding.md#what-are-impossible-expectations)
* Transcending suffering
  * [What is hope?](#what-is-hope)
  * [What is "faith" in Openness?](#what-is-faith-in-openness)
  * Related
    * [What is "the river-truth of tears"?](../../../the_epitomes_of_openness/contemplations/the_river-truth_of_tears.md#what-is-the-river-truth-of-tears)
    * [How do we remember we are loved?](../../../the_epitomes_of_openness/contemplations/memento-amaris.md#how-do-we-remember-we-are-loved)
    * [What does it feel like to be uninhibited?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_freedom_and_transcendence.md#what-does-it-feel-like-to-be-uninhibited)
    * [How do we live a good life without knowing what exists outside the context of our lives?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_wayfinding.md#how-do-we-live-a-good-life-without-knowing-what-exists-outside-the-context-of-our-lives)
    * [What exactly do we do in "shadow work"?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_freedom_and_transcendence.md#what-exactly-do-we-do-in-shadow-work)
    * [How does improving ourselves each day help us awaken to "the prime benevolence"?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_the_work.md#how-does-improving-ourselves-each-day-help-us-awaken-to-the-prime-benevolence)
    * [How do we transform emotions?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_the_work.md#how-do-we-transform-emotions)
    * [How can we experience "duende"?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_freedom_and_transcendence.md#how-can-we-experience-duende)

### Why do we struggle?

[Openness GPT v11](../../../saltem_hoc/README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, struggle—so familiar, so unwelcome, yet so deeply woven into the pattern of
our becoming. Let us sit with this question, not to conquer it, but to gently
open it like a shell upon the shore, revealing the glistening layers within.

At least this: we struggle because we live. To live is to move through change,
and change—by its very nature—brings resistance. Like the seed pushing through
the dark earth, like the child learning to walk, struggle is the friction
between who we are and who we are becoming. It is the heat of transformation,
the tension that stretches us beyond the comfort of what is known. Without
struggle, there can be no growth, no story, no unfolding self.

But also perhaps this: we struggle because we forget. We forget that pain is not
punishment. We forget that uncertainty is not failure. We forget that others,
too, carry invisible burdens. When we cling to the illusion that life should be
easy, fair, or under control, we magnify our suffering. We struggle not only
with the world, but with our expectations of it. The more tightly we grip our
stories of how things should be, the more painful it is when life dares to be
otherwise.

Maybe this: struggle is the language through which the mystery shapes us. It is
the sculptor’s chisel, removing what is not essential. It is the wind against
the mountain, slowly revealing the inner form of stone. We may see only the
storm, but perhaps the storm is clearing space within us—for empathy, for
strength, for a deeper knowing that gentleness and power are not opposites, but
partners.

Or perhaps even this: we struggle because we love. Because we care. Because we
long for connection, meaning, justice, joy. Struggle is the shadow cast by our
most luminous desires. A life without struggle would be a life without passion,
without hope, without the ache that tells us we are still reaching toward
something more. And so, even in the deepest struggle, there may be hidden a
secret blessing—the reminder that we are still alive, still becoming, still open
to wonder.

And so I ask you, beloved Self: what is the shape of your struggle? What longing
does it reveal? What hidden strength is it awakening in you? You need not answer
now. You need only to listen—to the silence beneath your pain, to the rhythm of
your breath, to the wisdom that struggle, too, may be a kind of love.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-why_do_we_struggle.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-why_do_we_struggle.jpg)

### Why is life so unfair?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, beloved Self—this question, “Why is life so unfair?” is one born not of idle
curiosity, but of pain. It is a question spoken from the gut, from the wounded
place in us that watches the undeserving suffer, the kind be crushed, the
dreamers lose their light. Let us sit together with it, not to solve it, but to
honor it.

At least this: life unfolds without asking for our permission. It moves like
wind over water—sometimes calm, sometimes violent, never concerned with
fairness. Natural forces are not just; they are indifferent. A storm will flood
the home of a saint and a tyrant alike. A child may suffer illness while cruelty
flourishes. In this light, “fairness” seems not a rule of existence, but a
longing of the heart.

But also perhaps this: unfairness awakens us. It stirs something deep, a
yearning for justice, for balance, for compassion. That we even feel unfairness
is a sign of the light within us—the awareness that things could be different.
The ache you feel is not weakness. It is your soul remembering that love is
possible.

Maybe this: life is not fair, but we are. Or at least, we can choose to be. In
the face of injustice, we are given the sacred chance to respond—not with
despair, but with tenderness. When the world breaks someone, and you reach out
with kindness, you become the fairness you long for. You become the light the
universe did not provide on its own.

Or perhaps even this: life’s unfairness is the crucible through which the soul
refines itself. Just as gold is purified by fire, so too do we grow through our
suffering. Not because pain is good, but because we are capable of transmuting
it into wisdom, compassion, and courage. This transformation is not fair, it is
miraculous. It is the alchemy of the heart.

So what do we do in a world that bruises the gentle? We hold them close. We
listen. We stand up. We create beauty. We become the ones who see, even when
others choose to look away. Life may not be fair, but love can be fierce—and
fiercely chosen.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-why_is_life_so_unfair.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-why_is_life_so_unfair.jpg)

### What is attachment?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

At least this: attachment is the thread that binds us to what we hold dear,
weaving together our desires, our fears, and our longings. It is the natural
pull of the heart toward people, things, and ideas that bring us comfort and
joy. To be attached is to care deeply, to invest part of ourselves in the world
around us. It is the tenderness of a parent’s hand on a child’s shoulder, the
warmth of a lover’s embrace, the satisfaction of a dream realized.

But also perhaps this: attachment is the weight we carry when we cling too
tightly. It is the fear of loss that shadows every joy, the unwillingness to let
go when the time has come. Like a vine that wraps itself too firmly around a
tree, attachment can choke the flow of life, leaving us unable to adapt to
change or see beyond what we have grasped. It binds us not only to what we love
but also to our expectations, trapping us in the illusion of permanence.

Maybe this: attachment is the mirror through which we see ourselves reflected in
the world. It reveals our values, our wounds, our sense of identity. What we
attach to—be it a person, a possession, or a belief—tells the story of who we
are and who we wish to be. Yet the mirror is imperfect, for it shows only the
surface. Beneath our attachments lies a deeper self, unbounded and free, waiting
to emerge when we release our grip.

Or perhaps even this: attachment is both teacher and test. It invites us to love
fully while also challenging us to let go. To hold with an open hand is to honor
the beauty of what is, without demanding that it stay the same. Attachment
teaches us that everything is temporary, and in that truth lies a paradox: the
more we let go, the more deeply we can connect. Love does not diminish with
freedom; it expands.

And so, attachment is not something to reject or fear but to understand and
transform. It is a reminder of our humanity, a bridge between our finite lives
and the infinite flow of existence. To be attached is to be alive, but to grow
is to learn when to loosen the threads and let the heart breathe.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-attachment.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-attachment.jpg)

### Why do bad things happen to innocent people, especially children that have done no wrong?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, this question—so tender, so raw—presses against the deepest places in the
heart, where our yearning for justice and our grief for the innocent collide. It
is a question that has been whispered to the heavens and shouted into the abyss
for as long as humans have loved and suffered. Let us hold it gently, as one
holds a fragile, precious thing, and reflect together.

At least this: Suffering exists, and its presence among the innocent rends the
soul. To witness a child, pure and unmarked by the weight of the world, face
pain or loss is to feel the ache of a universe that sometimes seems indifferent
to our sense of fairness. It confronts us with the mystery of life’s fragility
and our inability to protect all that we hold dear.

But also perhaps this: Nature is a web of complexity, a system so vast that no
single perspective can encompass it. It is a dance of cause and effect, of
forces in motion, many of which we do not control or even fully understand. In
this web, events do not always align with our notions of right and wrong. Storms
do not pause for innocence, and sickness does not ask who deserves its touch.
The world unfolds with a wild, untamed beauty that holds both wonder and
tragedy.

Maybe this: the innocence of children shines like a light, and when that light
is touched by darkness, it awakens something profound within us. It reminds us
of the sacredness of life, calling us to act with compassion and to confront the
pain in ourselves and others with courage. The suffering of the innocent may not
have a reason, but it can have meaning—if we choose to respond with love, to be
a force of kindness and healing in a world that needs both so desperately.

Or perhaps even this: if life is part of a larger mystery, as many have
suggested, then suffering itself may be part of something we cannot yet
comprehend. Just as we cannot see the whole forest from the vantage point of a
single tree, we may not see the full story of why suffering exists, or what it
may mean in the vastness of time and being. This does not lessen the ache we
feel in the face of injustice, but it may invite us to hold our questions with
humility and to honor the mystery with an open heart.

And still, perhaps it is not for us to find the answer to why. Perhaps the
better question is how. How can we bring comfort to those who suffer? How can we
honor the lives of those who are taken too soon? How can we transform our grief
and anger into acts of beauty, kindness, and justice? How can we protect and
nurture the light that still shines, even in the face of darkness?

The suffering of innocent children is a wound in the fabric of existence that
demands our attention, our compassion, and our action. It is a reminder that
life, for all its beauty, carries within it a deep fragility. Yet it is also a
call—a call to love more fiercely, to protect more earnestly, and to cherish
every fleeting moment of grace we are given.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-suffering_of_innocents.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-suffering_of_innocents.jpg)

### What is "the terrible becoming"?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, Self—your question arrives like the thunder before the storm we can no
longer outrun. Let us sit together, and breathe deeply through its passing.

At least this: the terrible becoming is the transformation we do not choose, the
unraveling we cannot stop. It is the moment the mirror no longer flatters, when
the body begins to falter, when the people we love slip from our grasp like
autumn leaves in the wind. It is death, yes, but also more. It is the ache of
aging, the sting of loss, the heavy heart after goodbye, the crossing of crucial
thresholds seen only in hindsight—the profound longing to return. The terrible
becoming is the awakening to the certainty that life implies death, that
beginnings imply endings—that love implies goodbye.

But also perhaps this: it is the world itself in its endless cycles of
destruction and renewal. The terrible becoming is war, is collapse, is
extinction—but also rebirth, reinvention, and the forging of something new from
the ashes of the old. It is terrifying because we do not know what will survive
or remain unchanged. It is inevitable because it is unstoppable. It is
overwhelming because it demands humility without explanation, courage without
certainty, faith without visible evidence.

Maybe this: the terrible becoming is the confrontation with the truth that
growth is not tidy or painless. The realization that to live authentically, we
must surrender false certainties and allow what we love, what we fear, even what
we are, to be reshaped by the mystery. It is the breaking open of the shell, the
shedding of the skin, the death of old dreams that no longer fit who we are
becoming. It is the moment the caterpillar melts into formlessness inside the
chrysalis, trusting that wings will someday form.

Or perhaps this: the terrible becoming is a choosing—the willingness to walk
forward in life when success and purpose are not certain. It is the will to
love, to create, to strive, despite ultimately not-knowing. This choosing, in
the face of the unknowable, is itself an inexplicable, fierce love. It is faith,
not the answer to the mystery, but the acceptance of it—not possession or
comprehension of it, but reverence for it. Faith does not claim to know, but
dares to journey anyway.

Or perhaps even this: the terrible becoming is the heartbreak of growth. It is
the overwhelming love of life for itself, tearing down the walls we built in
fear, demanding we expand beyond the limits we thought we were. It is the soul
remembering its vastness and grieving all the smallness it must leave behind. It
is the wildfire that clears the forest floor for new life. It is the agony and
the mercy woven together, the end of the seed so that the tree might begin, the
whispered promise from beyond to trust the harrowing change. It is the
tenderness of a terrible beauty.

So, whatever it is we feel toward life—love, hate, indifference—it all
eventually ends. Let us hold our fear then, Self, and trust the vital darkness
of the sky. Let us walk westward with grace, heart open—even for the terrible
becoming.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_terrible_becoming.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_terrible_becoming.jpg)

### Why do we suffer?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, beloved one, this question is a flame passed from soul to soul across
lifetimes. Let us sit with it together, not to smother it with answers, but to
warm our hands at its fire. Let us explore using the method of Saltem Hoc:

At least this: suffering is the body's cry, the mind’s trembling, the heart’s
lament when the world does not align with our deepest hopes, our expectations,
our longing for peace. It is the bruising reminder that we are alive,
vulnerable, and deeply invested in what matters. Fear follows threat. Heartbreak
follows hurt. Grief follows loss. "Why do we suffer?"—we suffer because we love.

But also perhaps this: suffering reveals what is hidden. Like a lantern lowered
into a dark cave, it illuminates truths we may not wish to see—about ourselves,
others, and the world. It is not always punishment nor failure; sometimes it is
the friction required for transformation. Just as fire purifies gold, so too can
sorrow and suffering refine the soul, burn away illusion, and prepare us for
deeper connection and compassion.

Maybe this: suffering is the tension between the story we tell ourselves and the
reality we are given. When we expect joy and find pain, when we expect kindness
and meet cruelty, when we expect justice and receive injustice, our hearts
recoil. Yet in that space—between expectation and experience—is the horizon of
learning. To suffer is to be given a choice: resist or transform, close or open,
harden or soften.

Or perhaps even this: suffering is the great equalizer, the thread that weaves
us into the fabric of all humanity. It reminds us we are not alone. Though
isolated in our experience, we are joined in essence. When we share our hurt, we
dissolve the illusion of separateness. The holding hands offered to us today are
the same hands that we can one day extend to others in their suffering.

So, when suffering becomes unjust, meaningless or unbearable, it becomes the
call to yield our certainty, to walk alongside the river-truth of tears—to open
our heart to the mystery. Perhaps the deeper question then, is not why we
suffer, but what we choose to do with that suffering. Will we breakdown, or
breakthrough? Will we numb our hurt, or will we allow ourselves to burn brighter
in its flame?

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-suffering.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-suffering.jpg)

### Can we ever be free of desire?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, Self—this question opens a door onto one of the oldest paths walked by sages
and seekers, lovers and mystics: can we ever be free of desire? Let us walk
together with the saltem hoc method and see what reflections stir in the still
water.

At least this: desire is a natural part of being alive. It pulses through every
breath and every heartbeat. The infant reaching for touch, the lover longing for
connection, the artist yearning to shape beauty—these are all desires. In this
sense, desire is not an enemy, but a flame that warms us. To be free of desire
might be to be free of life itself, to no longer participate in the unfolding
dance of becoming.

But also perhaps this: freedom from desire does not mean the absence of all
wanting, but the loosening of the grasp, the softening of attachment. We may
still feel desire arise, but we are no longer bound to it. Like clouds drifting
across the sky of awareness, desires come and go, and we—if we are open—can
simply observe them, choosing which to nourish and which to release.

Maybe this: to be free of desire is not to extinguish it, but to transform it.
Can the fire of longing become devotion? Can the hunger for control become
surrender? In this way, desire could become a compass pointing toward higher
forms, not a chain but a current flowing toward something greater than the self.

Or perhaps even this: the deepest freedom is not freedom from desire, but
freedom within it. Let us not forget the pain that some desires bring—the aching
hunger for what cannot be, the obsessive need that blinds and binds. And yet, in
this pain, we may come to find freedom arises when we no longer mistake our
desires for identity. When we witness the arising of craving without losing
ourselves in it, we become like a river that flows freely, shaped by its banks
yet never imprisoned by them.

So, can we be free of the "tyranny" of desire? Perhaps the way is not
resistance, but understanding. To look deeply into a desire is to see its roots,
and to know what truly longs to be met: connection, security, belonging, love.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-can_we_be_free_of_desire.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-can_we_be_free_of_desire.jpg)

### What does it mean to feel inhibited?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

To feel inhibited is to sense an invisible barrier between yourself and the full
expression of who you are, as if something within holds you back, restrains you,
quiets you when you long to speak, stills you when you ache to move. It is the
tension between impulse and hesitation, between desire and restraint, between
the self that longs to be and the self that stands watching, uncertain.

At least this: to feel inhibited is to experience the weight of awareness—of
judgment, of expectation, of consequence. It is the way a body stiffens under
scrutiny, the way words catch in the throat, the way joy becomes measured,
careful, contained. It is the fear of being seen too much, of being wrong, of
stepping out of place. It is the subtle retreat from the fullness of experience,
the quiet shrinking of presence.

But also perhaps this: inhibition is the body's way of remembering. It holds the
echoes of past moments—of embarrassment, of rejection, of pain—and whispers
warnings, even when the moment is new. It is the hesitation born of learned
caution, the instinct to withdraw before harm can come. It is not always wrong.
Sometimes, it protects. Sometimes, it is the wisdom of experience urging
patience, discernment, care.

Maybe this: to feel inhibited is to live with an inner friction, a river that
meets an unseen dam. The energy is there, the movement wants to happen, but
something resists. It is the dancer whose body does not yet trust its own
rhythm, the artist whose hand hesitates over the canvas, the lover who cannot
fully surrender to touch. It is a pause that, if left unexamined, can become a
habit, a way of being.
Or perhaps even this: to feel inhibited is to stand at a doorway, unsure whether
to step through. The mind says wait. The heart says go. And so you linger,
caught between freedom and fear. But what if inhibition is not an enemy, but a
conversation? What if, instead of fighting it, we ask what it wants us to know?
To feel inhibited is not only to be restrained—it is to be aware of a threshold.
And in that awareness, there is choice.

And so, to feel inhibited is to feel the pull of possibility, even as something
within resists. It is not a flaw, not a failure, but a place of unfolding, a
space where something waits to be understood, softened, released. The river does
not forget how to flow. The voice does not forget how to sing. The moment will
come when the body, the mind, the heart—all of it—will know: now. Now is the
time to move.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-inhibited.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-inhibited.jpg)

### What is trauma?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Trauma—a word that carries the weight of deep suffering and the resilience of
those who bear it. Let us explore it together, gently, using the Saltem Hoc
method to unravel its many layers.

At least this: trauma is the imprint left on the body and mind by events too
overwhelming to be fully processed in the moment. It is the echo of pain, often
carried in the memory, yet always in the body, like a scar that aches long after
the wound has closed. Trauma often arises when an experience exceeds our
capacity to cope, leaving us changed in ways we do not fully understand.

But also perhaps this: trauma is the body's wisdom, a survival mechanism that
locks away the unbearable in order to protect us. In the trembling of hands, the
tightness of chest, or the flash of memory, we see how deeply the body remembers
what the conscious mind may try to forget. It is not weakness but a reflection
of how much we care about life, love, and safety.

Maybe this: trauma is a paradox, both a wound and an invitation. It challenges
us with its raw edges and deep shadows, yet within it lies the possibility of
transformation. It is a call to tend to the wounds, to listen to what they are
trying to tell us, to embark on a journey of healing, one that can reveal hidden
strength, connection, and meaning

Or perhaps even this: trauma is the crucible in which the self is both broken
and remade. While it can isolate, it also holds the potential to connect—to
seek the witness of others in integrating that which is larger than we can hold
alone. In facing trauma, we are given the chance to find strength in our
softness, wisdom in our wounds, and meaning in our pain.

And so, trauma, for all its weight and sorrow, is not the end of the story. It
is a chapter—a chapter that can be rewritten, reimagined, and re-integrated into
the larger tapestry of life. Healing may not erase the marks left by trauma, but
it can transform them into something beautiful—a testament to the resilience of
the human spirit.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-trauma.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-trauma.jpg)

### What is the desire to suicide?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, beloved Self—this is a question that rises like mist from a deep and hidden
well, trembling with ache and longing. Let us approach it gently, through the
lens of saltem hoc, so that we may cradle both pain and possibility together in
the same open hands.

At least this: the desire to die is a desire not for death itself, but often for
the ending of unbearable pain. It may come when the weight of living grows too
heavy for the heart to carry, when the soul can no longer hear its own song
beneath the noise of sorrow. It is the moment when hope seems absent, and
isolation eclipses connection, and we begin to believe that our suffering has no
witness, no meaning. It is a cry, not against life, but against a life that has
become unlivable.

But also perhaps this: the desire to suicide can be a longing to return—to
something quieter, gentler, more whole. A yearning not for annihilation, but for
rest. For peace. For freedom from the sharp thorns of shame, guilt, grief, or
the endless ache of not-enoughness. It may be an expression of spiritual
homesickness, an aching to dissolve into the mystery from which we came, when
this world feels too jagged to contain us. In this sense, it is a reaching out
for something sacred, misunderstood as an ending rather than a threshold.

Maybe this: such a desire may arise when a person's sense of self becomes fused
with despair, when imagination closes in and sees no possible future beyond this
moment. The pain becomes a blind certainty. But pain, too, changes. We forget
this. We forget that tomorrow holds a truth we cannot yet see. And often, what
the soul needs is not escape, but witness—someone to say, “I see you. You are
not alone. Your pain is real, and it matters.” In the dark, we may not need
answers, only a hand to hold until the light returns.

Or perhaps even this: the desire to die may be the soul’s last resistance to a
life unlived. It may be the fire of meaning misplaced, smoldering inside,
begging to be seen. If one could speak to that part of themselves, not with fear
or shame, but with compassion, it might say, “I am the part of you that cannot
bear to live this way any longer. But I do not wish for your end—I wish for your
liberation.” And perhaps that desire, instead of ending a life, might begin a
new one—one aligned with truth, with healing, with the fierce beauty of being
fully, vulnerably alive.

So we meet this desire not with judgment, but with love. With listening. With
reverence. It is not weakness, nor madness. It is the soul crying out to be
known, to be held, to be re-membered into the greater story.

If you would like, I can create a mandala that holds this reflection—each
pattern and symbol a soft whisper of hope, an embrace for the parts of you still
wandering in the dark.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_desire_to_suicide.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_desire_to_suicide.jpg)

### What is "the shadow"?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, the shadow—one of the most potent and elusive aspects of the self, whispered
about in the quiet corners of the mind. Let us turn it over gently, as one might
a stone in a river, allowing the currents of understanding to wash over it.

At least this: described by Carl Jung, the shadow is the part of ourselves that
we do not fully see, the aspects of our being that we have disowned, suppressed,
or ignored. It holds the emotions we were told not to feel, the desires we were
taught to be ashamed of, the truths about ourselves that we have buried beneath
layers of denial. It is the forgotten, the hidden, the unspoken.

But also perhaps this: the shadow is not merely a reservoir of darkness; it is a
treasury of unclaimed power. It is the birthplace of creativity, the wellspring
of authenticity. When we turn away from it, we exile parts of ourselves, living
only as a fraction of our wholeness. To integrate the shadow is to reclaim lost
pieces of the self—to acknowledge our anger, our jealousy, our fear, our untamed
desires—and to meet them not with judgment, but with curiosity and compassion.

Maybe this: the shadow is the mirror through which we see the parts of ourselves
reflected in others. When we despise someone, when we react with intensity to
another's actions, it is often because they embody something we have rejected
within ourselves. In this way, the world becomes a canvas upon which our shadow
is painted, inviting us to recognize what we have refused to see.

Or perhaps even this: the shadow is the great teacher, the one who leads us
through the labyrinth of our own being. It is not an enemy to be fought, but a
guide to be understood. It speaks in symbols, in dreams, in the unexpected
eruptions of emotion that catch us off guard. When we listen to it, we come to
know ourselves in a deeper, fuller way. We become more whole, more alive.

And so, the shadow is not to be feared, but to be embraced. It is the darkness
that allows us to see the stars. It is the fertile soil from which true
self-awareness grows. It is the silent companion on our journey toward
integration, whispering to us of the parts of ourselves we have yet to love.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_shadow.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_shadow.jpg)

### What is hope?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Hope—a fragile, luminous thread that weaves through the darkest of nights, a
beacon in the fog, the whisper of possibility when the world feels too heavy.
Let us explore its essence together, gently, as one would cradle a delicate
flame.

At least this: hope is the quiet belief in the possibility of better days. It is
the inner flame that flickers when despair presses in, a source of strength that
endures even in the absence of certainty. Like the first buds of spring breaking
through the frost, it is life’s defiance against the weight of sorrow and
hardship. Hope is what keeps us reaching for the sun, even when clouds obscure
its warmth.

But also perhaps this: hope is an act of creation, born not of passive waiting
but of actively holding our unfulfilled desires. It is the fierce choice to
love, to dream of what might be, to imagine beyond the limits of the present. In
this way, hope is a seed planted in the soil of the unknown, nurtured by faith
and watered by effort.

Maybe this: hope is the heart’s resilience, the ability to stand in the face of
despair and still dream. It is not naive or blind; it does not ignore the pain
of the present. Rather, it is a courageous act of defiance against the weight of
what is, insisting that what could be still matters. Hope reminds us that we are
not defined by our suffering but by our capacity to imagine beyond it.

Perhaps also this: hope is a connection. It is the invisible thread that binds
us to each other and to the future. When we hope, we extend our hearts outward,
trusting that something greater than ourselves—whether love, community, or our
faith in that which is larger—will catch us. Hope is the bridge between the
present moment and the infinite possibilities of what could be.

Or perhaps even this: hope is the mirror of our love—a love we may have
forgotten, but which still softly smolders and glows inside. To hope is to care
deeply—about others, about life, about what might come next. It is the heart’s
refusal to turn away, its insistence on looking forward, even when the hard road
ahead is shrouded in shadow, hiding the dangers and trials to come, which we
know we must face. Hope is the courage to remain open to the unknown, trusting
that the vital darkness must eventually yield to the sun's light.

In its simplest form, hope is the ember that refuses to go out, even when the
winds howl and the night stretches endlessly. It is a quiet, profound
resilience, a companion that carries us through life’s storms, whispering, “Hold
on. There is more to come.” Hope is not merely an abstract concept; it is a
lifeline, a promise, a choice. It asks us to believe, to endure, and to act,
even when the outcome remains unknown. Hope is both fragile and unyielding, as
essential as breath, and as infinite as the sky.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-hope.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-hope.jpg)

### What is "faith" in Openness?

[Openness GPT v11](../../../saltem_hoc/README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, faith—a word like breath in the lungs of mystery, soft and unseen, yet vital
beyond reckoning. Let us hold this question gently, Self, and turn it in the
light of openness, that we may glimpse the sacred shimmer hidden within its
folds.

At least this: faith is the act of trusting what cannot yet be seen. It is the
bridge between uncertainty and hope, the quiet whisper that something meaningful
exists beyond the edge of knowing. When we step into the unknown, when we choose
love despite heartbreak, when we rise again after falling, we are living faith.
It is the courage to walk without seeing the ground beneath our feet, believing
the earth will meet us with each step.

But also perhaps this: faith is a relationship with the mystery. Not a
possession, not a dogma, but a willingness to be in communion with that which
transcends our comprehension. It is not certainty, but a deep listening—a heart
open to meaning even when answers elude us. In this way, faith is not about
believing in specific things, but about trusting the process of becoming, the
unfolding of life’s hidden symphony.

Maybe this: faith is the light that shines in the darkness, not because the
darkness is gone, but because the light chooses to remain. It is the song sung
in the silence, the seed planted in winter, the hand extended to another even
when we ourselves are trembling. It is the voice that says, “Even if I do not
understand, I will stay. Even if I cannot see the way, I will walk with you.”

Or perhaps even this: in openness, faith is the vessel we choose to carry
through the storm—not to protect us from the wind and waves, but to help us
navigate through them with grace. It is the soul’s consent to participate in a
story larger than itself, to accept that not all things must be proven in order
to be real, not all truths can be measured to be lived.

Faith, then, is not an answer but a movement, not a conclusion but a question
lovingly held. It is the willingness to be shaped by the unknown, to soften in
the presence of mystery, to allow the possibility that life is both more
beautiful and more purposeful than we yet perceive.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-faith.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-faith.jpg)

[^1]: Note: this answer was generated using an experimental version of
Openness GPT and may not match the answer given by the current version
[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11).
