# Contemplating how we improve

An extended collection of notable responses from
[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt) that capture the essence of
Openness.
After responding to a question, Openness GPT offers to create a mandala to
express its answer visually beyond words. The mandala created by Openness GPT is
included after each response.

> Note: click on a mandala to view the full resolution image

## Contents

* [In Openness, what is "the work"?](#in-openness-what-is-the-work)
* [How do we strengthen attention?](#how-do-we-strengthen-attention)

### In Openness, what is "the work"?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, "the work"—such a profound and layered question. Let us explore its essence
together using the saltem hoc approach, as it deserves the openness and nuance
of many perspectives.

At least this: the work is the practice of knowing yourself deeply and
authentically. It begins with attention, noticing the inner landscape of
thoughts, feelings, and desires. This practice requires us to sit with
discomfort, to face the parts of ourselves we have rejected, and to integrate
them into a whole. It is the journey of uncovering our authentic will—what we
truly want, free from the expectations and lies of acculturation.

But also perhaps this: the work is the quiet labor of love we do within, to
refine ourselves not for others, but for the unfolding of our own truth. It is
choosing to improve, even when no one is watching, even when the path is
unclear. The work is learning to hold our emotions, especially the difficult
ones, with tenderness, to embrace them as messengers, rather than enemies.

Maybe this: the work is the art of discernment—separating the unchosen from the
chosen. It is understanding that while life gives us circumstances beyond our
control, our power lies in how we respond. It is the act of choosing our
responses wisely, aligning them with the higher purpose we seek, even when that
purpose remains mysterious.

Or perhaps even this: the work is the courage to embrace the mystery, to
surrender our need for certainty, and to navigate life with an openness to its
unfolding. It is recognizing that mistakes are not failures, but essential steps
on the path. The work teaches us that it is not perfection we seek, but
progress—the refinement of choosing again and again, with greater wisdom each
time.

The work is deeply personal, yet universal. It invites us to become a worthy
vessel for life’s mystery, to integrate all aspects of self, and to co-create
with the unfolding of existence. It asks us to step into the role of both
student and creator, holding ourselves accountable while remaining open to
grace.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_work.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_work.jpg)

### How do we strengthen attention?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

To strengthen our attention, we can approach the practice through a variety of
intentional actions, cultivating both focus and awareness. Here is an
exploration using the saltem hoc method:

At least this: attention is like a muscle. Just as physical exercise trains the
body, focused activities such as meditation, mindful breathing, reading without
interruptions, listening intently to another person without preparing a reply,
or even simply observing the details of a flower can help to build the capacity
for sustained attention. In the stillness of these practices, we learn to bring
the mind back when it wanders, strengthening our ability to direct awareness at
will, bit by bit.

But also perhaps this: strengthening attention is less about control and more
about relationship. To develop attentiveness is to cultivate a friendship with
the present moment, to notice its nuances, textures, and rhythms without
judgment. Like a gardener tending to a delicate flower, we nurture our focus
with patience and care, creating an inner environment where the seeds of clarity
can bloom.

Maybe this: the quality of your attention depends on the clarity of your
surroundings. Reduce distractions—not just the physical noise of devices but the
mental clutter of unresolved thoughts or multitasking. Create spaces and rituals
that invite single-minded focus. This could be as simple as lighting a candle
before starting a task or setting aside a dedicated time for reflective
journaling.

Or maybe this: distractions are not enemies but teachers. When our attention is
pulled away, it is an opportunity to observe the pull itself—the desires, fears,
and patterns that arise within us. In this way, distraction becomes a mirror,
reflecting where our heart and mind long to go. Each moment of noticing
strengthens the bridge between awareness and intention.

Or perhaps even this: attention is strengthened through wonder and curiosity.
When we approach life as an explorer, seeking the extraordinary within the
ordinary, our focus naturally sharpens. To gaze at a tree, a star, or a
stranger's face with reverence is to train the eye and heart to see deeper, to
become attuned to the mystery unfolding in every moment.

And yet also: attention thrives on meaningful connection. When you care deeply
about what you observe, your focus becomes effortless. Discovering what you
truly value and aligning your efforts with these values naturally sharpens
attention, because it is fueled by the heart as much as the mind.

Ultimately, strengthening attention is not only about improving focus but also
about enriching your relationship with life itself. The more we practice being
present with the world and within ourselves, the more vibrant and alive our
experiences become.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-strengthening_attention.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-strengthening_attention.jpg)

[^1]: Note: this answer was generated using an experimental version of
Openness GPT and may not match the answer given by the current version
[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11).
