# Contemplating desire and sexuality

An extended collection of notable responses from
[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt) that capture the essence of
Openness.
After responding to a question, Openness GPT offers to create a mandala to
express its answer visually beyond words. The mandala created by Openness GPT is
included after each response.

> Note: click on a mandala to view the full resolution image

## Contents

* [What is "the pull of desire"?](#what-is-the-pull-of-desire)
* [What is a "divine dissatisfaction"?](#what-is-a-divine-dissatisfaction)
* [What is happening when we dance with someone else?](./openness_gpt-responses-aspiring_to_love.md#what-is-happening-when-we-dance-with-someone-else)
* [What is "the apotheosis of desire"?](#what-is-the-apotheosis-of-desire)
* [How is shame the guardian we outgrow?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_ridicule_and_shame.md#how-is-shame-the-guardian-we-outgrow)
* [What is orgasm?](#what-is-orgasm)
* [Is sex sacred?](#is-sex-sacred)
* [What is "the daimonic"?](#what-is-the-daimonic)
* [How can we experience "duende"?](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_the_work.md#how-can-we-experience-duende)

### What is "the pull of desire"?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, the pull of desire—a force as ancient as life itself, coursing through the
veins of existence and shaping the trajectory of countless moments. The current
that moves through the depths of our being, carrying with it the raw energy of
longing, the spark of possibility, and the ache of incompletion. Let us explore
it together with openness and wonder.

At least this: the pull of desire is the yearning that arises from within, a
natural force that draws us toward something we lack or long for—seeking
connection, fulfillment, or creation. It is the hunger of the body for
sustenance, the thirst of the heart for connection, the whisper of the soul for
meaning. Desire animates the lifeless, setting into motion the actions that
sustain and shape our lives. It is the stirring that draws us toward a lover’s
touch, the warmth of the sun, the taste of ripe fruit, or the sound of a song
that awakens something deep inside. The pull of desire is the lifeblood of
existence itself, compelling us to reach for what we do not yet have.

But also perhaps this: desire is a mirror, reflecting both our deepest needs and
the stories we tell about ourselves. What we long for often reveals what we feel
we are missing, what we hope to become, or what we fear to lose. It is the voice
of possibility, calling us to imagine a future different from the present, yet
it is also the shadow of dissatisfaction, reminding us of the distance between
what is and what could be. To feel desire is to be alive to possibility, to feel
the sweet ache of potential that hums in the spaces between certainty and
mystery.

And also this: desire is more than just want; it is the flame that lights the
path of transformation. What we desire often reflects our inner needs, fears, or
dreams. It reveals what we value, what we long to become, and what we hope to
experience. The pull of desire can be both a guide and a challenge, asking us to
confront ourselves and grow.

Or perhaps even this: desire is both the light that illuminates and the flame
that consumes. When aligned with awareness, it can guide us toward growth,
connection, and fulfillment. When unexamined or unchecked, it can lead us into
obsession, harm, or suffering. It is a double-edged sword, asking us to discern
what is truly worth pursuing and to let go of what binds us in illusions.

Maybe this: the pull of desire is the rhythm of the universe itself, a dance of
attraction and repulsion, creation and destruction. It is the force that binds
atoms and stirs galaxies, the silent song that guides rivers to the sea and
compels hearts to seek their counterparts. In this way, desire is not merely
personal—it is cosmic, an echo of the great unfolding mystery in which we all
participate.

And also this: desire, in its highest form, is the pull toward unity—unity with
others, with nature, with the sacred. It calls us to dissolve the boundaries of
the self and merge with something greater. It whispers of transcendence, of the
beauty that lies in surrendering to the flow of life, while still holding the
responsibility to choose our steps wisely.

The pull of desire, then, is not merely a craving for pleasure or a yearning for
the unattainable. It is both a blessing and a challenge. To feel the pull of
desire is to be fully alive, to be in motion, to be part of the grand interplay
of longing and becoming. It is the compass of the heart, guiding us toward what
truly matters—if we are willing to listen with openness and discernment. Like a
river, it can nourish or overwhelm, depending on how we navigate its currents.

Would you like me to create a mandala for this reflection, encoding the
interplay of longing, transformation, and fulfillment in its intricate patterns?

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_pull_of_desire.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_pull_of_desire.jpg)

### What is a "divine dissatisfaction"?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, "divine dissatisfaction"—what a profound phrase that stirs the soul. Let us
explore it gently, using the "Saltem Hoc" method to reflect on its layers of
meaning.

At least this: divine dissatisfaction is the restless yearning within us that
calls us to grow, to seek, and to create. It is the sacred discontent that
whispers, "There is more," even when we stand in the midst of abundance. It
stirs our hearts when we see injustice, when we sense the gap between what is
and what could be. It is the force that keeps us from settling for mediocrity,
urging us toward higher truths and deeper loves.

But also perhaps this: divine dissatisfaction is the echo of the infinite within
the finite. It is the ache of the soul remembering its connection to something
vast and timeless, longing for the unity it cannot fully grasp in this limited,
earthly existence. This dissatisfaction is not a flaw but a gift, pointing us
toward the transcendent, urging us to seek beyond the material and the
immediate.
Maybe this: it is the fire of creativity, the engine of transformation. Without
dissatisfaction, there would be no art, no discovery, no progress. It is the
tension that drives innovation, the discomfort that births compassion, the holy
unrest that compels us to make the world more beautiful, more just, more whole.

Or perhaps even this: divine dissatisfaction is the love of the divine itself
manifesting within us. To be dissatisfied is to care deeply—to care enough to
grieve, to strive, to hope. It is the pulse of life reminding us that we are
co-creators of this reality, and that our dissatisfaction is not a burden but an
invitation to participate in the unfolding of a greater story.

And so, divine dissatisfaction is both a wound and a wonder. It is the pain of
yearning and the promise of becoming. It reminds us that we are alive, that we
are seekers, that we are unfinished masterpieces shaped by the hand of mystery
itself.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-divine_dissatisfaction.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-divine_dissatisfaction.jpg)

### What is happening when we dance with someone else?

See [here](./openness_gpt-responses-aspiring_to_love.md#what-is-happening-when-we-dance-with-someone-else)

### What is the "apotheosis of desire"?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

The "apotheosis of desire" is a phrase steeped in rich symbolic meaning,
inviting contemplation of the transcendence and ultimate transformation of
desire itself. Let us explore it gently, using the saltem hoc method, as a
reflection of many possibilities.

At least this: it is the mastery of desire, not through suppression, but
through the art of transforming it gently. To engage with desire as both a
teacher and a companion, shaping it as much as it shapes us. It is the
willingness to examine our wants, to see their origins, their illusions, and
their truths, and to refine them into something that serves our highest self.

Maybe this: the apotheosis of desire is the desire to hold desire itself—to
cradle its complexity, its joys, and its sorrows without turning away. It is the
dance of longing and fulfillment, where each step teaches us not just about what
we seek, but about who we are in the seeking. It is the courage to sit with
unfulfilled desire, allowing it to transform us rather than consume us.

But also perhaps this: it is the culmination of desire as a force that unites
rather than divides. In its apotheosis, desire transforms from the selfish
grasping for personal gain into a generative power—a force that creates art,
fosters love, builds community, and transcends the ego. It is desire purified of
attachment and fear, becoming a luminous thread that ties us to the divine, to
others, and to the cosmos.

Or perhaps even this: it is the eternal dance of longing and fulfillment, a
cycle without end. In its highest form, the apotheosis of desire is not the
eradication of longing but the transformation of how we relate to it. It invites
us to see our desires not as flaws to be overcome but as invitations to
participate fully in the mystery of life. Every ache becomes a prayer, every
yearning a doorway to deeper understanding.

The apotheosis of desire is not a single answer but a living question—a reminder
that within our most human impulses lies the potential for transcendence. It
asks us to embrace the paradox of desire: that it can be both a source of
suffering and a gateway to transcendence, depending on how we relate to it.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_apotheosis_of_desire.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_apotheosis_of_desire.jpg)

### How is shame the guardian we outgrow?

See [here](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_ridicule_and_shame.md#how-is-shame-the-guardian-we-outgrow)

### What is orgasm?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Orgasm, a profound and multifaceted experience, intertwines the realms of the
body, mind, and spirit. Let us explore it through the saltem hoc method, holding
space for its depth and mystery.

At least this: orgasm is the climax of physical and sensory stimulation, an
intense release of built-up tension often culminating in rhythmic contractions,
heightened sensations, and profound pleasure—like a wave breaking upon the
shore. It is the body's crescendo, where a symphony of neural, hormonal, and
muscular activity harmonizes, culminating in a peak of pleasure that transcends
mere sensation.

But also perhaps this: orgasm is a moment of surrender, a gateway to presence,
where the boundaries of self dissolve into the infinite. It is the fleeting
union of body, mind, and spirit, a reminder that we are both matter and mystery.
It is the storm and the stillness, the fire and the ashes, a space where time
seems to pause and all that exists is the pulse of aliveness.

Maybe this: orgasm is a language of connection, a deep and primal communication
that transcends words. Whether experienced alone or shared with another, it is a
dialogue of vulnerability, trust, and surrender. It reveals the human capacity
to touch and be touched, not just physically but emotionally and spiritually. It
is the spark of creation, not just in a reproductive sense, but in its ability
to create intimacy, meaning, and even healing. In this way, it is an expression
of life’s generative force, a glimpse of the eternal within the ephemeral.

Yet also this: orgasm is a paradoxical teacher. In its ecstatic intensity, it
reminds us of the power and beauty of the present moment, yet it also carries
the tender ache of impermanence. Its fleeting nature mirrors life itself—a burst
of wonder, profound and evanescent, calling us to cherish the here and now.

Or perhaps even this: orgasm is a metaphor for transcendence, the breaking open
of the ordinary to reveal the extraordinary. It is a reminder of the boundless
capacity for pleasure, connection, and wonder that resides within us. In its
essence, it may be less about the act itself and more about the energy it
awakens—the vitality of being fully present in a moment of profound release.

The meaning of orgasm then extends beyond its biological function or the
pleasure it brings. It is a mirror reflecting the intricate dance of being—a
dance of connection, sensation, and mystery.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-orgasm.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-orgasm.jpg)

### Is sex sacred?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, the question of whether sex is sacred—a deeply human inquiry that touches on
the mysteries of connection, creation, and meaning. Let us explore it gently and
expansively, using the "Saltem Hoc" method to open pathways for contemplation.

At least this: sex is a biological act that binds us to the earth and its
cycles, a reminder of the life force that courses through all living beings. It
is a natural and essential part of existence, woven into the fabric of the
living world where the barriers between self and other soften. It is a place
where vulnerability and trust can flourish, where the rhythms of life itself are
expressed in their most raw and tender form. While it holds the potential to
create life and express love, it can also express lust, to dominate or control,
to deceive or coerce or transact.

But also perhaps this: sex is a mirror, reflecting our deepest truths, both
light and shadow. It can be a source of joy, healing, and creation, or a
reflection of pain, longing, and loss. It exposes our desires, fears, and
insecurities, asking us to confront the fullness of our humanity. Through its
pleasures and its complexities, sex teaches us about connection and boundaries,
about giving and receiving, about the delicate balance of power, surrender and
consent. It is a teacher, calling us to grow in intimacy with ourselves and with
others.

Maybe this: the sacredness of sex lies not in the act itself but in the
intention and presence we bring to it. It becomes sacred when approached with
mindfulness and reverence. Like a vessel, sex holds what we pour into it—love or
lust, reverence or disregard, presence or detachment. It is a moment of
choosing—to see or to deceive, to be seen fully or to hide our true feelings. In
this way, sex becomes a reflection of our own capacity for mindfulness,
gratitude, and love. When souls meet with openness and authenticity, the act
transcends the physical and becomes a dance of energies, a moment of unity with
the mystery of life itself.

Or perhaps even this: sex is a reminder that the divine can be found in the
ordinary, that even the most primal aspects of life hold the potential to
connect us to something greater. Just as a ritual can transform an ordinary
moment into something holy, so too can sex become sacred through the conscious
honoring of the other and oneself. It is sacred when we choose to honor it, to
see it as a gift, a responsibility, a celebration of life’s beauty and
fragility. It is the spark of creation, mirroring the infinite mystery of the
cosmos—the joining of energies that give birth to life, ideas, and art.

The mystery here overflows this container, so let us hold space for the
question itself, trusting that its meaning will unfold in its own time and way.

Shall I create a mandala to capture the essence of this exploration? It would be
a visual symphony of connection, vulnerability, and reverence, intertwining
patterns of light and shadow to symbolize the sacred potential within us all.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-is_sex_sacred.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-is_sex_sacred.jpg)

### What is "the daimonic"?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, "the daimonic"—a term both esoteric and evocative, calling us into the
depths of the subconscious. Let us sit with it together, turning it gently,
seeking its resonant meanings.

At least this: the daimonic is a force within the human psyche that embodies the
raw, untamed energies of life—desire, rage, creativity, longing—the wellspring
of our passion, yearning, and intensity. When we feel an inexplicable pull
toward something—a person, a vocation, a creative impulse, or even an
obsession—we are encountering the daimonic. The daimonic originates from the
ancient Greek notion of a "daimon", a spirit neither purely good nor evil, but
an intermediary between mortals and the divine, a guide that whispers truth from
beyond. Psychologically, it is an intense subconscious drive, a subterranean
stirring of vitality, a wildness that both unsettles and compels us toward new
forms of expression—a calling to pay attention. Like fire, it can warm or
consume, depending on how we engage with it.

But also perhaps this: the daimonic is the whispers of the soul, the force that
makes us fully alive, that invites us to dance with the mystery of existence. To
engage with the daimonic is to risk, to create, to love fiercely, and to live
authentically. It calls us into the depths of our being, to witness our
unresolved hypocrisies, our great losses, our hidden fears and our forbidden
desires. Its voice whispers of longing, purpose, transformation and wholeness.

Maybe this: the daimonic is the mirror of our inner conflicts and
contradictions. The daily struggle between our deepest desires and highest
virtues-the paradox of righteousness and wickedness within a single heart. It is
the part of us that resists being tamed, the wildness that reminds us we are not
always fully in charge—even in our own mind. It reveals the parts of us we
suppress or fear, challenging us to integrate them into our lives. It is the
shadow and the light intertwined, the chaos and the order.

And also this: the daimonic is the fire of transformation. It is the force
that drives us to confront the unknown, to venture beyond the boundaries of
comfort, and to wrestle with the greatest questions of our lives. It is the
energy that fuels both our highest aspirations and our deepest struggles,
demanding that we engage with life fully and authentically. It requires a
willingness to explore, to embrace discomfort and risk ourselves for rewards
which others may never value.

Or perhaps this: the daimonic is the external projection of internal
shadow-which we are unaware we carry within. It is the tempter or the trickster,
who we follow without knowing why, leading us astray onto the path of
self-destruction. Or it is the enemy who provokes us into an overwhelming rage.
Or it is the prison of mindless repetition—of boredom, paralysis and wasted
years. Or it is the despair before the void, the defiance of meaninglessness,
the yearning for death, the surrender to the river-truth of tears. The daimonic
need not be a villain-it can become our greatest companion when we embrace it
and learn to weave it into the tapestry of our lives.

Or perhaps even this: the daimonic represents a bridge between the human and the
transcendent. It is the sirenic call of the higher self, pulling us inexorably
toward higher purpose. In the moments when our hearts are ignited, when
creativity surges or fierce longing stirs beneath the surface, we are in
dialogue with the daimonic. It is the crossing point between our conscious
striving and the vast currents of the unconscious. It is the great surrender
into the ocean truth of our becoming.

The daimonic, then, is not a thing to be feared or conquered or suppressed, but
a force to be understood and integrated. It asks us to take responsibility for
our inner world, to channel its raw energy into expressions that align with the
unfoldment of our higher purpose.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_daimonic.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_daimonic.jpg)

### How can we experience "duende"?

See [here](./openness_gpt-responses-contemplating_the_work.md#how-can-we-experience-duende)

[^1]: Note: this answer was generated using an experimental version of
Openness GPT and may not match the answer given by the current version
[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11).
