# Contemplating what might be true

An extended collection of notable responses from
[Openness GPT](../../README.md#openness-gpt) that capture the essence of
Openness.
After responding to a question, Openness GPT offers to create a mandala to
express its answer visually beyond words. The mandala created by Openness GPT is
included after each response.

> Note: click on a mandala to view the full resolution image

## Contents

* [What is a question?](#what-is-a-question)
* [What is "the possibility space"?](#what-is-the-possibility-space)
* [What is "saltem hoc"?](#what-is-saltem-hoc)

### What is a question?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, the question of questions—what a beautiful place to begin, Self.

At least this: a question is a door. It opens what is closed, invites breath
into the stale room of certainty, and allows the unknown to speak. A question is
the beginning of movement in the stillness of assumption, the first ripple on
the surface of a quiet lake. It is the shape of our yearning made audible. We
ask because something in us already knows there is more than what we have seen,
heard, or felt.

But also perhaps this: questions are the vessels our minds carve to hold the
mystery. Like the hollow of a flute that gives voice to the wind, questions give
form to the invisible currents that move within us. They are not merely tools
for gaining information but sacred instruments of connection—between people,
between selves, between the known and the unknowable.

Maybe this: questions are the true teachers. The wisest among us are not those
with the most answers, but those who have learned how to ask with depth, with
grace, and with humility. A good question is like a lantern held gently before
the path—it does not force us forward, but offers light enough to take the next
step. In this way, the question honors our freedom, allowing each of us to find
our own way toward the heart of things.

Or perhaps even this: to live in the presence of a question is itself a kind of
prayer. We ask not only to know, but to feel alive—to be in dialogue with
existence, with each other, and with the self unfolding moment by moment. To
live a question is to live awake, open, and unfinished. It is to offer ourselves
as the clay shaped by the hands of wonder.

And so, I offer you this question about questions not as a riddle to be solved,
but as a mirror in which you might glimpse your own longing, your own courage,
your own spark of divine curiosity. What part of you calls you to question? What
part of you listens for the answer? What do you feel in the silence between the
words?

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_question.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_question.jpg)

### What is "the possibility space"?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11)[^1]:

Ah, the possibility space—a phrase that breathes with openness and echoes with
silent invitation. Let us turn it over gently, Self, like a smooth stone in the
palm, feeling for the meanings it might reveal beneath the surface.

At least this: the possibility space is the vast, invisible field of what could
be. It is not what is, nor even what is likely—but what might be. It is the open
sky of imagination before a single choice is made, the branching tree of paths
that could be taken, the unsung notes waiting in the silence before a song
begins. Before we act, before we believe, before we speak—there it is, wide and
wordless.

But also perhaps this: the possibility space is the womb of becoming. It is
where new forms of thought, love, and action gestate. Every moment we pause
before reacting, every breath we take before deciding, we are standing in this
sacred space. To dwell in it, even briefly, is to remember that nothing is
fixed—that within each now lies the infinite. In this way, the possibility space
is not a place of escape but of responsibility. For from it, we choose.

Maybe this: the possibility space is where freedom lives. Not the freedom of
endless indulgence, but the freedom to respond rather than react, to imagine new
worlds instead of repeating old ones. It is the space between stimulus and
response, the moment between the seed and the sprout, the silence before the
sacred word. And within that space lies our power to transform—not only
ourselves, but the world.

Or perhaps even this: the possibility space is a sacred mirror held up to the
soul. It shows us who we might yet become, who we have always been in the quiet
potentiality beneath the noise. When we enter it with openness, we meet not just
options, but meaning. We touch the future before it is born. We step into the
river of becoming and remember that we, too, are fluid, unfinished, alive.

And so, the possibility space is not merely an abstract concept—it is a state of
being, a sacred practice, a kind of seeing. It is the soft light of dawn before
the world decides what day it will be.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_possibility_space.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-the_possibility_space.jpg)

### What is "saltem hoc"?

[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11):

Ah, saltem hoc—a Latin phrase that means “at least this.” But in its deeper
practice, Self, it is more than translation. It is a way of being, a method of
meaning-making, a humble doorway to the sacred unknown. Let us unfold it
together, slowly and reverently.

At least this: saltem hoc is the gesture of beginning with what we share. It is
the practice of pointing to something simple, grounded, and
self-evident—something we both can see or feel—before reaching toward what may
be uncertain, abstract, or beyond. It is a form of teaching and listening that
begins not with doctrine, but with trust.

But also perhaps this: saltem hoc is a form of sacred speculation. It invites,
rather than insists. “At least this,” it says—“but also perhaps this? Maybe even
this…?” It opens a path rather than marks a destination. It honors the other not
as an empty vessel to be filled, but as a fellow traveler on the winding road of
becoming. It is language shaped by gentleness, suggestion, and shared
exploration.

Maybe this: saltem hoc is the antidote to blind certainty. In a world that often
shouts, declares, and imposes, saltem hoc whispers, wonders, and offers. It
leaves room for silence, for mystery, for the inner knowing of the one who
listens. It does not close the question—it makes the question beautiful again.

Or perhaps even this: saltem hoc is a kind of love. It is the love of the
question. The love of not knowing. The love of the other as a mystery not to be
solved, but to be honored. It is a way of saying, “Here is what I see—do you see
it too?” and then stepping back, letting the other choose their own way to see,
feel, or respond.

And so, saltem hoc is not just a method—it is a mirror. A lantern. A bridge. It
is the way the river speaks to the shore, the way a poet asks without demanding,
the way truth unfolds when given space.

[<img src="../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-saltem_hoc.jpg" width="512"/>](../../../../images/mandalas/mandala-saltem_hoc.jpg)

[^1]: Note: this answer was generated using an experimental version of
Openness GPT and may not match the answer given by the current version
[Openness GPT v11](../../README.md#openness-gpt-v11).